Editor's Introduction to This Issue.

This is a special issue, consisting over 10 selected dissertations that were awarded in 3 genome analysis competitions (KOGO Young Scientist Best Paper Award, KNIH KARE Data Analysis Award, and KOBIC Bioinformatics Software Award), hosted by KOGO (Korea Genome Organization) in 2014.

A dissertation (In-Pyo Baek et al.)

on developing software that defines and visualizes phenotype-related single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) among whole SNVs through next-generation sequencing (NGS) won the grand prize for the KOBIC award, and the KNIH KARE award was given to the elucidation of epigenetic interactions of genes regulated by non-coding elements in complex diseases by Min Kyung Sung et al.

The other 8 consist of dissertations regarding GAWS, genomewide classification of miRNA, and short-read phasing for constructing haplotypes in certain genomic loci that are associated with BMI.

In addition, there are 4 review papers on diverse genome research issues.

Dr. Feng Zhang's group of Fudan University reviewed the genomic architecture, synthesis mechanism, and biological roles of copy number variants.

Dr. Hyun-Seok Park's group of Ewha Womans University reviewed the design of hidden Markov models and their application in solving various computational problems in epigenetics.

Drs.

Seon-Hee Yim and Yeun-Jun Chung reviewed current issues in direct-to consumer genetic testing.

Dr. Perumal Elumalai reviewed the chemo-preventive potential of nimbolide for cancer treatment.

Several genetic association studies in hyperuricemia, maturity-onset diabetes, BMI, and insulin levels will be interesting for readers.

In silico characterization of a drug target candidate enzyme in legionellosis, rifampicin resistance mechanisms in tuberculosis treatment, and a study of phytochemicals for the treatment of type 1 diabetes will be useful information for researchers in this field.

Genomics & Informatics is already available in PubMed Central and PubMed.

Recently, Genomics & Informatics applied for listing in SCOPUS.

