KBUD: The Korea Brain UniGene Database.

Human brain EST data provide important clues for our understanding    of    the    molecular    biology    associated    with the    function    of    the    normal    brain    and    the    molecular pathophysiology    with    brain    disorders.

To    systematically and efficiently    study the function and disorders of the human brain, 45,773 human brain ESTs were collected

from 27 human brain cDNA libraries, which were constructed from normal brains and brain disorders such as brain tumors, Parkinson’s disease (PD) and epilepsy.

An analysis of 45,773 human brain ESTs using our EST analysis pipeline resulted in 38,396 high-quality ESTs and 35,906 ESTs, which were coalesced into 8,246 unique gene clusters, showing a significant similarity to known genes in the human RefSeq, human mRNAs and UniGene database.

In addition, among 8,246 gene clusters, 4,287 genes (52%) were found to contain full-length    cDNA    clones.

To    facilitate    the    extraction    of useful information in collected these human brain ESTs, we developed a user-friendly interface system, the Korea Brain Unigene Database (KBUD).

The KBUD web interface allows access to our human brain data through three major search modes, the BioCarta pathway, keywords and BLAST searches.

Each result when viewed     in     KBUD     offers     comprehensive     information concerning the analyzed human brain ESTs provided by our data as well as data linked to various other public databases.

The user-friendly developed KBUD, the first world-wide web interface for human brain EST data with ESTs of human brain disorders as well as normal brains, will    be    a    helpful    system    for    developing    a    better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the normal brain well as brain disorders.

The KBUD system is    freely    accessible    at    http://kugi.kribb.re.kr/KU/cgi

The    large-scale    EST    collections    of    mammalian    brains including    the    human    brain    were    performed    to    rapidly identify the expressed genes and understand the gene regulation in the brain.

These brain ESTs have been produced as the result of worldwide efforts, with major contributions being made through the Brain Molecular Anatomy    Project    (BMAP,    http://trans.nih.gov/bmap/ ),    the NIH-Mammalian     Gene     Collection     (MGC,     http://mgc.nci .

nih.gov/ ), and the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP, http://cgap.nci.nih.gov ).

These efforts permit the discovery of transcripts that are expressed in the brain and    attempt    to    localize    the    site    of    expression    of    all transcripts in the brain by large-scale parallel analyses of gene expression.

In addition, the collected brain ESTs can serve as key resources for brain functional studies based on genomics, including exon detection, alternative splicing    analysis,    single-nucleotide    polymorphisms    (SNPs) and gene expression studies using a microarray as well as gene discovery and gene mapping (Adams et al., 1992; Boguski et al., 1995; Ermolaeva et al., 1998; Mathe et al., 2002; Picoult-Newberg eta!., 1999).

In addition, an EST set obtained from specific regions of the brain in the case of certain brain diseases provides molecular insights into biological     phenomena     and     cellular     physiology     under specific brain disease conditions.

Several databases for genes that are expressed in the brain have been reported to date.

The NCBI’s dbEST database ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/ ) supplies BMAP mouse brain EST sequences.

The CGAP website provides an index of the genes that are generated in various cancer tissues including brain cancer in humans and the mouse.

In addition, the Electronic Atlas of the Developing Human Brain (EADHB) database (http://www.

ncl.ac.uk/ihg/EADHB/database/EADHB_database.html)

and    the    EMAGE    Mouse    Gene    Expression    Database provide gene expression patterns during the early development of the human brain, and information related to spatial 2D and 3D visualizations for them.

The human brain EST database, which provides information concerning


genes expressed in normal human brain as well as human brain disorders such as brain tumor and PD, has not been reported,    although    the    BMAP    database    supplies    mouse brain ESTs and the CGAP database supplies for genes expressed in    various    cancer    tissues    including    human brain cancer.

To systematically and efficiently study the function and disorders of the human brain, a collection of an entire set of genes expressed in the normal brain and in brain disorders    such    as    brain    tumor,    PD    and    epilepsy    was performed as a part of the MOST 21C Frontier R & D program in neuroscience, started in Korea.

For the efficient collection    of    full-length    cDNAs    and    rarely    expressed genes, we used oligo-capping methods to construct full-length cDNA libraries (Oh et al., 2004) and Bento Soares’s method to construct a normalized cDNA library (Soares et al., 1994).

By large scale sequencing of the clones from these brain libraries, a large number of human brain ESTs could be generated.

To extract various type of information from these brain ESTs and facilitate their use, we developed a user-friendly web interface, the Korea Brain Unigene Database (KBUD) system.

In this paper, we describe the human brain EST analysis pipeline, the construction of the KBUD system and its use.

The KBUD system    provides    the    various    information    of    our    human brain ESTs and allows the investigator to undertake a sophisticated search using relevant (inked websites.

The human brain EST sequences used in this study were obtained by the 5’-end sequencing of the clones from 27 high-quality brain cDNA libraries containing a full-length cDNA library, normalized cDNA libraries and subtracted cDNA libraries, constructed using various methods, as described previously (Kim etal., 2004; Oh et al., 2004; Soares etal., 1994).

The brain tissue samples used were

as follows: One normal brain tissue, ten different brain tumor tissues, and one temporal lobe and three different hippocampuses    from    epilepsy    patients    as    well    as    one normal substantia nigra from a normal subject and one substantia nigra from a PD patient.

Pre-processing:     Base-calling     and     quality     assessment were performed with the phred program (Ewing et al.

1998).

Vector and linker sequences were located using the     FASTA     ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/fasta/ )     program     and were subsequently removed.

Low-quality bases defined by the phred program were trimmed from both ends of the

EST    sequences.

Human    repetitive    elements    and    low complexity regions were masked using the RepeatMasker ( http://repeatmasker.genome.washington.edu ) program.

EST sequences having an identity of at least 90% with human mitochondrial DNAs or ribosomal RNAs over at least 90bp were also excluded.

ESTs of at least 100 bp after both vector and low-quality trimming were regarded as "high-quality" ESTs.

Annofetfon:The annotation of the ESTs was carried out by

stand-alone     BLAST     programs     and     locally     installed databases     (Altschul     et     al.,     1990).

The     individual high-quality    ESTs    were    searched    against    the    human RefSeq    (Pruitt    etal.,    2005).

The    remaining    ESTs    were searched    against    the    human    mRNA    ( ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/ genbank/) subset extracted from the GenBank database and subsequently    against    the    UniGene    database    (Hs.seq.all, build #184) for similarity comparisons using BLASTN.

We carried out a BLAST search with a cut-off identity of 97% and an E value of 1 e' 10 , and over at least 100 bp of ESTs compared with the RefSeq, GenBank mRNA and UniGene data.

After the ESTs were clustered into gene indices by the BLAST results and a cDNA clone containing the best hit score in each cluster was invested with ID (ex.BKU000001), selected    as    a    representative    unique    gene.

The    CAP3 program was used to assemble the ESTs in each cluster into contigs (Huang etal., 1999).

Determination    of    full-length    cDNA:    The    fullness    of    our human brain ESTs was determined by comparing EST sequences    against    the    coding    sequences    of    Human RefSeq entries and known human mRNAs.

We categorized them into four groups, as follows: 1) full-length cDNA (Full); at least 97% identity over the first 100 bases of the CDS (coding sequence), including the ATG initiation codon, 2) candidate    full-length    cDNA    (Can-Full);    matched    at    least 100 bp against the 5’ UTR of the upstream CDS region, 3) partial    cDNA    (Partial);    not    containing    an    ATG    initiation codon and matched at least 100 bp against CDS region, 4) 3’ UTR; not covering any CDS region and matched to the 3’ UTR of the downstream CDS region, 5) Unknown; matched only against ESTs or a gene having an unknown CDS region which can not be defined.

KBUD was written using python and perl script for the EST annotation    work    and    was    implemented    in    a    relational database    structure    using    MySQL    DBMS.

The    web-front end    was    handwritten    in    HTML.

Web-based    database searching    was    implemented    with    CGl-Perl    scripts.

To allow a BLAST search of the user’s query data, the BLAST

suite of programs were downloaded from the NCBI BLAST ftp site ( ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/ ).

For the collection of ESTs expressed in the human brain,

we    constructed    27    brain    cDNA    libraries    from    various human brain tissues, as shown in Table 1.

Brain tumor tissues such as, glioblastoma, oligodendroglioma, neuroblastoma and meningioma, were used in order to study the pathogenesis of brain tumors.

In addition, brain tissues obtained from patients with PD and epilepsy were used in order to study other brain disorders.

27 cDNA libraries     consisting    of    19    full-length    enriched    cDNA libraries, and 7 normalized cDNA libraries and 1 subtracted library were constructed from the start full-length cDNA libraries in order to discover genes that are rarely expressed in the brain.

In total, 45,773 clones were randomly selected from these 27 libraries and were used for    5’-end    single-pass    sequencing.

These    brain    ESTs served as the key data set of KBUD.

In addition, human brain EST will    continue to be generated from various cDNA libraries    and will be updated in the KBUD accordingly.

The obtained 45,773 EST sequences were subjected to quality    control    procedures,    as    shown    in    pre-processing diagram in Fig.1, namely, trimming of the vector region and the removal of low-quality or short (less than 100 bp) sequences.

After screening out 1,616 ESTs derived from


mitochondrial     DNAs,     ribosomal     DNAs,     and     human repetitive    sequences,    38,396    high-quality    ESTs    with    an average length of 589 bp were generated.

To    annotate    high-quality    ESTs,    38,396    ESTs    were sequentially analyzed, as shown in the annotation process of Fig.1.

When we compared these ESTs with human RefSeq using the BLAST program, 28,787 ESTs (75%) showed a significant similarity to known genes in the human RefSeq and the remaining 6,072 ESTs (15%) were matched to human mRNAs.

In addition, the remaining 1,048 EST (3%) were matched to UniGene ESTs and 2,490 (7%) showed no match or a match lower than 97% nucleotide identity to previously reported known genes in the public database.

A total of 35,906 known ESTs were clustered into 8,246 unique known genes based on BLAST similarity scores.

The cluster number per total known ESTs was estimated to be about 23% (8,246 /35,906) from a transcript analysis using the CAP3 program.

The complexity of the collected genes, on average, was slightly higher than that of the Cap-trapper cDNA libraries collated by normalization and subtraction (Carninci et al., 2000).

Table 2 shows that 8,246 unique gene clusters consisting of 4,777 of contigs and 6,597 of singletons were obtained using the CAP3 program.

The 4,777 contigs were assembled from 29,309 EST sequences.

To determine the fullness of our human brain ESTs, 8,246 gene clusters for 38,396 high quality ESTs were compared to human RefSeq entires and known mRNA.

As shown in Fig.2, 4,287 genes (52%) were shown to contain    full-length    cDNA    clones    (21,434),    whereas    291 (4%)     contained     candidate     full-length     cDNA     clones (1,198).

In addition, 1,908 genes (23%) contained only partial cDNA clones (7,062) and 1,760 (15%) matched only the 3’ UTR of genes from cDNA clones (5,164).

The frequency of full-length cDNA containing full-length

cDNA    and    candidate    full-length    cDNA    is    56%,    slightly lower than that reported by other    researchers using full-length cDNA libraries.

These     data concerning full-length cDNAs generated from various brain sources help in understanding the regulation of the transcription of genes expressed in the human brain and could be used in a functional analysis of the human brain.

All of these data are stored in the KBUD system.

To facilitate the use of the analyzed human brain ESTs and to provide useful information concerning these ESTs for other investigators, we constructed a user-friendly web interface, the KBUD system using our human brain EST data set.

As shown in Fig.3, the KBUD web interface allows easy access to the data through three major search modes, the BioCarta pathway, keyword and BLAST searches.

Each result provides concise information concerning an interesting gene in the human brain    ESTs    and    more    detailed    information    can    be obtained    using    data linked    to    diverse    public databases such as Unigene, OMIM and Ensemble.

The public database links and sequence analysis links provide a variety    of    resources    related    to    Korea    Brain    UniGene (KBU) on the internet.

The wide variety of information for KBU using useful links permit the user to more easily and quickly analyze the gene for further study.

From our KBUD web page at http://kugi.kribb.re.kr/KU/


cgi- bin/brain.pl , users can retrieve various information on human brain ESTs in several ways as described below.

In the pathway search viewer, displays of protein-protein interactions within pathways for human cellular processes are provided, including diagrams of molecular assemblies.

Users can select a pathway of interest from a list of 311 pathways which are arranged in alphabetical order, and the result view offers a dynamic graphical model and the summarized table of genes involved in the pathway, as shown in Fig.4.

The graphical model shows how genes


interact in the pathway and the summarized table provides the specific gene ID, BKU ID that represents our brain cDNA.

Each specific gene ID is directly linked to its gene information page generated from several public databases such as GenBank, UniGene and CGAP.

The pathway search viewer allows the user to easily access entire sets of interacting genes in a specific pathway.

The information can be used to facilitate an understanding of the molecular pathway and to help design more focused experiments for validating the biological process in human brain disease and in therapeutics.

Through the keyword search viewer, users can also search for interesting brain cDNAs using the gene symbol, BKU ID, original clone ID, Genbank accession number, UniGene ID and gene title.

Fig.5 shows the output image screen of keyword search viewer.

The result view shows the summarized gene information of the brain cDNA of in­ terest, KBU, and provides the sophisticated information derived from other linked useful websites.

This page con­ sists of a three-party summarized table such as clone in­ formation, public database match and sequence analysis links.

The    clone    information    part    provides    basic    brain


cDNA data such as the mRNA source, vector, fullness, 5’ end sequence and its length read, supplied by us.

The pub­ lic database match shows various type of information on annotated gene generated from matched RefSeq or mRNA, OMIM, Gene Ontology (GO), BioCarta pathway database and BLAST result.

Moreover, Links to other well-known databases provide information concerning re­ lated diseases or gene expression and protein structure or genome information.

The sequence analysis part also offers a useful website such as BLOCKS and ATGpr to search the motif or initiation site of the sequence.

In addition, the BLAST search viewer allows BLAST searching of the user’s query against our brain data set through a user-friendly implemented interface with the BLAST programs such as, BLASTN, TBLASTN, as shown in Fig.6.

Information on brain ESTs as the result of large scale analysis is known to provide important clues for un­ derstanding the functions of the nervous system and the molecular pathophysiology of brain disorders (Boguski and Jones, 2004; Gong etal., 2003).

KBUD is the first world-wide web interface for human brain EST data generated mainly from Korean patients with brain disorders such as brain tumors, PD and epilepsy.

The KBUD system is quickly and easily accessible to any investigator for searching the interesting brain cDNAs and also permits more detailed analyses using useful linked websites in our system.

The user-friendly developed KBUD system will be a helpful system in understanding brain tumor biology or neuro- degenerative pathology.

