Development of a Knowledge Base for Korean.

Pharmacogenomics Research Network

Pharmacogenomics research requires an intelligent in­ tegration of large-scale genomic and clinical data with

public and private knowledge resources.

We developed a web-based knowledge base for KPRN (Korea Pharmacogenomics Research Network, http://kprn.snubi .

org/).

Four major types of information is integrated; ge­ netic variation, drug information, disease information, and literature annotation.

Eighteen Korean pharmacoge­ nomics research groups in collaboration have submitted 859 genotype data sets for 91 disease-related genes.

Integrative analysis and visualization of the large collec­ tion of data supported by integrated biomedical path­ ways and ontology resources are provided with a user-friendly interface and visualization engine empowered by Generic Genome Browser.

Human Genome map is nearly completed.

Pharmacoge­ netics and Pharmacogenomics which deal with the ge­ netic or genomic basis underlying variable drug re­ sponses in individuals have become the center of inter­ est all over the world.

In this situation, it is recognized that pharmacogenomic and pharmacogenetic studies form a field of study that can be applied in clinical medi­ cine at the earliest time.

And many biomedicalogists are interested in this field because they believe that it can make individualized therapy possible.

It is expected that a technique of individual therapy in genetic basis will be put to practical use in patient

treatment within 10 years.

Experts in this field have tried to apply the technique to a part of treatment with drugs although there still remains limitation.

At present, there is a centralized database, Pharm GKB(Klein eta/., 2001) (Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base), where researchers store the outcome of the phar­ macogenomics study world wide.

PharmGKB provides the functions in which we can collect and search for the result of study about what drug response occurs in in­ dividuals according to genetic variation.

The standard of data model for pharmacogenomics data, however, is not present, yet.

Moreover, it is hard to find a database ex­ cept PharmGKB which collects pharmacogenomics data.

As a group of large research collaboration, KPRN felt the need of having its own repository system with in­ tegrated biomedical resources.

The present study intends to deal with pharmacogenomics data repository system being developed in KPRN.

Its goals include central­ ization of the domestic pharmacogenomics data, pre­ venting duplication of similiar research, and information­ sharing among the joint research team as well as with the general research community.

It intends to provide ge­ nomic function information about sequence variance as well as expression, extending it to be knowledge-based.

1.

PharmGKB XML schema

PharmGKB    is    a    Knowledge-base    developed    at

the Stanford University for the function of searching and retrieving the result of research in pharmacogenomics ( http://www.pharmgkb.org/ ).

Its XML schema explains information about sequence variation, drug data, and phenotype data.

It describes the information of side effects from a drug treatment that are caused by sequence variation.

One can find the details of the schema at http://www.pharmgkb.org/schema/index.html/ .

2.

Aperon drug database

We use the drug database made in Aperon(Kaiser, 2005) to capture the name of drug.

Presently, Aperon is also used by PharmGKB.

It catalogs 3,885 drug names, 9,176 generic names, and 9,177 trade name.

3.

Medical Subjects Heading (MeSH)

MeSHMeSH(Schulman etal., 2000), a thesaurus made by NLM (National Library of Medicine), is used for indexing an article in MEDLINE.

It provides a consistent way for searching the information that includes different terms for the same concepts.

For instance, a malignant tumor can be ordinarily named either 'neoplasm' or 'cancer*.

In MeSH, however, neoplasm is adopted.

Also, MeSH

terms old people 'aged'.

4.

USCS GoldenPat

Our knowledge base uses the GoldenPath(Kent et al., 2005; Karolchik etal., 2003) developed at the University of California to capture the position where a sequence variation occurred.

GoldenPath enables the use of absolute coordinate system for a position of variation on Human Chromosome Map, allowing a consistent positioning of variations and annotation on the basis of the position of variation.

ChromosomeNumber: BasePosition

For example, 'chr2:23451703' indicates the 23451703 rd position on the 2nd chromosome.

5.

Genew (Human Gene Nomenclature Database)

We use the gene name provided by Genew(Wain et al.,

2002) to associate it with the information of a sequence variation.

Genew is the precisely verified database by editors in HGNC (Human Gene Nomenclature Committee) for denominating name and symbol of human gene.

This database includes gene name, gene symbol, and alias symbol.

6.

Generic Genome Browser (GGB)

We use GGB(Stein etal., 2002) (Generic Genome Browser) to display information of both sequence variance and Human genome which are collected.

It is possible for GGB to show sequence-based information such as genome contig, genome information, STS (Sequence Tag Site), SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism), so on and so forth by track.

And also the GGB is designed to be able to be linked with other databases as each of track information.

We adopted this browser to indicate the information of allele frequency entered by users.

To store and search pharmacogenomics data, we de­ fined and modeled the relationship between sequence variance information, drug information, and phenotype information that describe pharmacokinetic or pharmaco-


dynamic effect which is different in sequence variance for dosage.

For the standardization of entering information for sequence variance, we use the Gene Symbol provided by Genew.

We accept MeSH terms as the standard for disease names in phenotype data.

The drug names are taken from Aperon database.

The relationship of each of information is illustrated in Fig.1.

In order to add literature annotation information, we have developed a system for inputting highly curated annotation of each gene, drug, and phenotype from documents published already.

Fig.2 shows such a form through which users can input data in­ to the system.

We accomplish the visualization of in­ formation of sequence variance by integrating the func­ tionalities supported by the Generic Genome Browser.

1) Information of Sequence variance

This part describes information of experiment about se­

quence information genotyped (i.e.

allele position, al­ leles, allele frequency, and amino acid transition and Gene symbol).

Actually, the marking rule in indicating allele po­ sition exists already.

For example, "CYP2C9, Arg144Cys" means that amino acid transition occurs at the 144th po­ sition of CYP2C9 gene, changing Arg to Cys.

But the re­ sult may vary depending where the experimenter count as the 1st position of the gene.

Thus we adopt an abso­ lute coordinate system by using GoldenPath position.

It prevents ambiguity which is caused by using relative po­ sition information and we need it to combine our data­ base with the others.

To mark alleles, we adopted the for­ mat described below.

The notation of amino acid transition is designed to understand one or three-letter codes.

There are two categories in allele frequency, control frequency and case frequency.

The former corresponds to searching for frequency in healthy volunteers, the latter in patients.

We used the Genew system to check what gene the


information of a sequence variation be included by.

For a gene, more than one symbols may exist.

In case of an alpha-1 -B glycoprotein, alias symbols are A1B, ABG, GAB, HTSY2477 and so on.

So, we need an official gene symbol that represents them for preventing ambiguity caused by redundancy.

We use 23,449 official symbols now.

2) Drug information

We use the drug database made in Aperon to input the name of drug.

Presently, it is also used by PharmGKB.

The Aperon drug database consists of 3,885 drug names, 9,176 generic names, and 9,177 trade names.

When users search or retrieve drug name, generic name, and trade name simultaneously, it gives proper drug name to users to use.

3) Phenotype information

The phenotype that the gene in point shows when a drug is administered into normal group/patient group is described in phenotype information.

We use the MeSH

term to describe disease name used for input and classify phenotype into five categories used in PharmGKB.

This system uses EAV (Entity-Attribute-Value) model(Anjoy eta/., 2003) because each phenotype information is input in each category but cannot be input as unified or abbreviated form.

4) Literature Annotation

We developed a Literature Annotation system to search for the information of pharmacogenomics that is published already because we intend to get literature information which is highly curated by researchers.

The Literature Annotation consists of PubMed information, keyword, abstract, related gene, drug, and disease information that can be input and retrieved.

5) Visualization using Generic Genome Browser

We used Generic Genome Browser (GGB) to visualize

information of sequence variance.

It is possible for GGB to show sequence-based information by tracks.

Also it is designed to be able to be linked with other databases as each of track information.

We modified this browser to indicate the information of allele frequency entered by users (Fig.3).

This paper introduces the knowledge base for KPRN we have developed for storing and searching for pharmaco­ genomics data with integrated biomedical resources.

The system includes sequence information from phar- macogenomic experiment, drug data, phenotype data coincided with the drug data, literature annotation, and visualization of sequence variance information.

We used thesaurus in MeSH, Genew and many standard systems for building the knowledge base to describe gene in­ formation, drug information, phenotype information.

The system enables to link with other public databases for in­ put information and helps understand pharmacoge­ nomics data by means of visualization.

At present, 859 genotype data sets are integrated for 91 genes by the 18 research groups.

The number of input data will ex­ ponentially increase in the near future.

Except for the PharmGKB in Stanford, there has been no standard for storing pharmacogenomics data.

But we think that ours is a valuable effort to create our own knowledge base for understanding and using pharmaco­ genomics data.

We hope it will server for the develop­ ment of a standard for collaborative and integrative phar­ macogenomics research.

