Changes of Gene Expression in NIH3T3 Cells Exposed to Osmotic and Oxidative Stresses Cells consistently face stressful conditions, which cause them to modulate a variety of intracellular processes and adapt to these environmental changes via regulation of gene expression.    

Hyperosmotic and oxidative stresses are significant stressors that induce cellular damage, and finally cell death. 

In this study, oligonucleotide microarrays were employed to investigate mRNA level changes in cells exposed to hyperosmotic or oxidative conditions. 

In addition, since heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is one of the most inducible stress proteins and plays pivotal role to protect cells against stressful condition, we performed microarray analysis in HSP70 overexpressing cells to identify the genes expressed in a HSP70-dependent manner. 

Under hyperosmotic or oxidative stress conditions, a variety of genes showed altered expression. 

Down­ regulation of protein phosphatasel beta (PP1 beta) and sphingosine-1-phosphate phosphatase 1 (SPPasel) was detected in both stress conditions. 

Microarray analysis of HSP70-overexpressing cells demonstrated that diverse mRNA species depend on the level of cellular HSP70. 

Genes encoding lysyl oxidase, thrombospondin 1, and procollagen displayed altered expression in all tested conditions. 

The results of this study will be useful to construct networks of stress response genes.

Exposure of cells to sudden stress deleteriously affects their survival. 

However, a transition from a mild to harsh stress or repeated exposure to stress renders cells stress tolerance.     

Cells can modulate a variety of intracellular processes by changing gene expression to adapt to new stressful conditions.     

This conserved cellular response to harmful stimuli is referred as ‘stress response’.

Hyperosmotic and oxidative stresses present significant challenges to cells. 

Cells respond to osmotic stress by compensational changes in cell volume, water content, and intracellular solute concentration. 

Some genes induced by osmotic stress have been identified (Kultz and Csonka, 1999; Cai eta/., 2004). 

High levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) causes cellular damage and induces apoptosis, which is mediated through the mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway and results in the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (Kemp et al., 2003). 

Although the gene expressions of some genes related to stress response are known, global gene expression patterns are not.

Heat shock proteins (also known as stress proteins) have prominent roles in stress tolerance. 

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is the most inducible protein during stress response and is highly conserved from bacteria to mammals (Tanaka et al.,1988). 

HSP70 can be induced by various stressors including hyperthermia, hyperosmolarity, oxidative stress, heavy metals, and amino acid analogues (Morimoto et al., 1992; Abe et al., 1998; Fukamachi et al., 1998). 

The induction of HSP70 has been shown to enhance cell survival after exposure to harmful stimuli (Jaattela, 1999).    

HSP70 has an important function as a molecular chaperone (Hartl, 1996) and an anti-apoptotic molecule (Li et a!., 2000a; Beere et al., 2000; Saleh et al., 2000).

In this study, to profile global gene expression under hyperosmotic or oxidative stress conditions, oligonucleotide array analyses were performed. 

Since HSP70 plays an essential role in the acquisition of stress tolerance, altered gene expressions were also analyzed in HSP70 overexpressing cells. 

We found that a number of genes altered their expressions in response to hyperosmotic or oxidative stress, and the HSP70 level in a cell. 

These kinds of altered gene expressions act as countermeasures against stress, and help maintain homeostasis.

NIH3T3 and HSP70-overexpressing NIH3T3 cells were grown in DMEM media supplemented with 10 % heat- inactivated fetal bovine serum and 50 pg/ml penicillin and streptomycin in a 5 % CO 2 incubator at 37°C. 

For hyperosmotic or oxidative stress conditions, cells were kept in media containing 130 mM sodium chloride or 1.0 mM H2O2 for 2 hours. 

For heat shock condition, culture plates containing cells were tightly wrapped with parafilm and immersed in a water bath at the indicated temperature for 30 min, then kept in CO2 incubator at 3 7°C for indicated times.

Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent(Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 

The purity was assessed by the examination of 18S and 28S bands after gel electrophoresis, and from the A260/A280.

First strand cDNA were synthesized using 100 pg of total RNA with oligo dT primer and reverse tranacriptase in the presence of cyanine Cy3 or Cy 5 dye at 42 °C for 1 h.

They were hybridized overnight at 42°C to the MAGIC Oligo-Mouse 11K® chip (Macrogen Inc., Seoul, Korea) according to the protocol recommended by manufacturer. 

The slides were scanned with Array scanner generation III (Molecular dynamics, UK). 

The images were analyzed using Image 5.5® software (Biodiscovery, USA).

After washing with phosphate-buffered saline, the cells were scraped and collected in extraction buffer (1% Triton X-100,1% sodium deoxycholate, 25 mM Tris HCI, pH 7.4, 0.1% SDS, 137 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA). 

The collected cells were incubated on ice for 30 min. 

The lysate was centrifuged and quantitated with BCA Protein Assay Reagents (Pierce, IL, USA). The equal amounts of total proteins were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. 

HSP70 band was detected by sequential treatment with an anti- HSP70 antibody purchased from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, USA), an HRP conjugated secondary antibody, and an enhanced chemiluminescence substrate kit.

For Northern blot analysis, 10 pg of total RNA was fractionated on a 1% formaldehyde agarose gel, blotted onto Hybond-N+ nylon membrane (Amersham, NJ, USA).    

The 32 P-labeled probes by random priming kit (Amersham, NJ, USA) were hybridized to the blots at 62°C in a Modified Church Hybridization Buffer (0.25 MNa2HPO 4> 1 mM EDTA, 1% casein, 7% SDS, adjust pH to 7.4 with H3PO4). 

The blots were washed under high stringency and autoradiographed on the X-ray films (AGFA, Germany).

Total RNA (2 pg) was reverse transcribed from ologo-dT primers, and the resulting cDNA was amplified by PCR using gene-specific primers.     

Primer sequences are followed: Cdknla (p21) sense 5'AGTCTCTGGTGATCT GCTGCTC, antisense 5-GACACTGAGCAATGGCTG GACT; Tnfsf 9 sense 5'ATGGACCAGCACACACTT, antisense 5-GACAACCCATGGGAATGA; Nfkbia sense 5' GCCATGTTTCAGCCAGCT, antisense 5’GGCCAGC GTCTGACATTA. 

GAPDH was internal control for amount of cDNA used for each reaction.

After NIH3T3 cells were exposed to NaCI or H2O2, HSP70 induction was monitored as a marker of stress response, since HSP70 is one of the most inducible proteins during stress response. 

HSP70 was enormously induced 10 h after treatment with either 130 mM NaCI or 1 mM H2O2 for 2 h (Figure 1 A). Total RNAs were isolated from cells exposed to these stressful conditions.    

Synthesized cDNAs were hybridized to a MAGIC Oligo-Mouse 11K® chip (Macrogen Inc.). 

This experiment was performed in triplicate and genes with significantly and consistently altered expressions were identified.      

Under the hyperosmotic condition, 12 genes were up-regulated and 16 down-regulated (Table 1). 

The most prominently increased expression was nuclear factor of kappa light chain gene enhancer in B-cells inhibitor, alpha (NFKBIA). 

NFKBIA inhibits the action of NF-kappaB by forming a heterodimer with NF-Kappa B, which is a transcription factor for the expression of many genes involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, or metastasis (Curranet al., 2002).    

It has beenreported that the inhibition of NFKBIA phosphorylation sensitizes cells to radiation (Ding et al., 2003). 

From our results, the most affected transcription factor might be NFkappaB, since its inhibitor level was increased 19 fold under hyperosmotic stress.    

On the other hand, eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha 1 was down-regulated.    

It is generally known that the cells under stress suppress the de novo synthesis of protein except some stress-related proteins. 

Our results show that translation elongation factor 1 might be important for the suppression of protein synthesis in conditions of hyperosmotic stress.    

Polo-like kinase 2, which regulates cell cycle was also down- regulated (Ma et al., 2003). 

Protein phosphatase 1 beta isoform (PP1 beta) and sphingosine I phosphate phosphatase 1 (SPPasel) were decreased by 2.7 and 4.1 fold, respectively. 

The fine regulation of protein phosphorylation is essential to transmit proper signals intracellularly. 

The expression level of PP1 can be specifically affected by various cellular stresses (Amador et al., 2004). 

These authors suggested that the monitoring of PP1 expression could be a useful diagnostic tool for cellular stress, since alterations of PP1 expression is an immediate early stress response, which occurs before heat shock protein alterations. 

From our chip data, it was supported that PP1 could be a sensitive stress marker molecule like HSP70. 

When we observed the induction levels of HSP70 mRNA 2h after heat shock, heat shock markedly induced HSP70 mRNA as shown in Figure 1B (left panel) Whereas HSP70 mRNA was not detected within 2 h under oxidative stress condition, and was induced extremely low level of HSP70 mRNA 2 h under hyperosmotic stress (Figure 1B, left panel). 

In both cases, HSP70 mRNA was detectable 6 h or 12 h after treating with stressors (Fig 1B, right panel). 

Our result suggests that immediate induction of HSP70 seems to depend on the type of stress.    

Sphingosin-1-phosphate (SPP) has multiple functions as a second messenger in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and apoptosis (Johnson et al., 2003).  
  
The loss of SPPase results in cellular tolerance to stress, and the overexpression of SPPase provokes apoptosis (Mandala, 2001). 

Therefore, the regulation of the phingosin-1-phosphate level by reducing SPPasel expression could be an important response to hyperosmotic stress.

In oxidatively stressed cells, 12 genes were up- regulated and 36 down-regulated (Table2). 

Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1a (CDKN1A, p21) was increased 3.8 fold. 

Cell cycle arrest is correlated with down-regulation of cyclin D1 and up-regulation of CDKN1A (Todd et al., 2004). 

Acutely challenged cells usually show cell cycle arrest, and adopt a stress to overcome the applied stress. 

Rapidly increased CDKN1A might have a major role on cell cycle arrest in oxidative condition.

We observed obvious increases in metallothionein 1 (MT1) expression. 

MT1 is small sulfhydryl-rich protein involved in cellular protection, probably by inhibiting oxidative stress (Wanpen etal., 2004; Li et al., 2004). 

Decreases in PP1 beta (3.0 fold) and SPPasel (3.6 fold) were also observed under oxidative stress condition.     

Genes encoding lysyl oxidase (LOX), thrombospondin 1 (TSP1), and several types of procollagen were down- regulated under hyperosmotic and oxidative stress. 

LOX is an enzyme that initiates the covalent crosslinking of polypeptide chains within extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, collagen and elastin.    

LOX expression was regulated by diverse stimuli including growth factors, angiotensin II, retinoic acid, and shear stress (Kagna and Li, 2003). 

LOX has roles in stress fiber formation and focal adhesion assembly (Li et al., 2000b).

Moreover, LOX is one of the genes known to be dysregulated in diseases associated with oxidative stress (Li    et    al., 2004). 

It has been suggested that LOX may have other important biological functions in addition to its role as an ECM cross linker. 

Another ECM molecule, TSP1 expression was decreased about 5 fold by both hyperosmotic and oxidative stress. 

TSP1 can exert cellular adhesive changes and pro- or anti-angiogenic effects. 

It was reported that TSP1 might be involved in cellular adaptation to cellular damage (Ann Elzie and Murphy-Ullrich, 2004; Espey etal., 2003). 

Collagens are major constituents of the ECR, and form large superfamilies. 

They are vital components of connective tissue, and are centrally involved in the formation of fibrillar and microfibrillar networks of the ECM, and in basement membranes as well as of other structures of the ECM (Gelse et al., 2003). 

Changes in the balance of ECR molecules can lead to collagen-related diseases (Siwik and Colucci, 2004). 

In this study, we found that cells under hyperosmotic or oxidative stress rapidly and obviously change the expression levels of ECM proteins. 

Cells under stress are able to induce stress response to prevent cellular damage by modulating gene expression. 

HSP70 is one of the most inducible genes involved in stress response. 

We generated HSP70- overexpressing NIH3T3 cells (NIH3T3HSP70), and observed cell viability comparing to empty vector transfected cells (NIH3T3-EV) under lethal hyperosmotic condition (Figure 2). 

Since HSP70 has pivotal roles in stress tolerance, we wanted to know which gene expressions are affected by changes in the intracellular level of HSP70. 

Microarray analysis showed that 19 genes were up-regulated and 24 down-regulated in HSP70- overexpressing cells (Table 3). 

The overexpression of HSP70 influenced the expressions of various molecules involving transcription, translation, cell division and growth, transport, proteolysis, cell adhesion and others. 

The signal transducing molecule, STAT, was down- regulated 2.9 fold. It suggests that HSP70 directly or indirectly affects STAT expression and mediates their signal transducing pathways. 

Interestingly, LOX (3.1 folds), TSP1 (7.7 folds), and procollagen type I (3.0 folds) were commonly down-regulated in HSP70-overexpressing NIH3T3 cells. 

The ECM is important for many cellular processes such as cell division, migration, differentiation, and death. 

Abnormalities of the ECM might be closely linked to diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, restenosis, tumor invasion and metastasis, and atherosclerosis (Lee et al., 2004). 

This means that the primary molecules targeted by hyperosmotic and oxidative insults are constituents of the ECM, and that HSP70 has key roles in ECM integrity. 

HSP70 is being considered for possibly use as a therapeutical molecule in diseases related with these protein families. We performed RT-PCR to confirm our microarray results as shown in Figure 3. 

These results showed that NFKBIA in hyperosmotic conditions, CDKN1A in oxidative conditions, and TNFSF9 in HSP70-overexpressing cells were up- regulated, in accord with the microarray results.
