Aging and UV Irradiation Related Changes of Gene Expression in Primary Human Keratinocytes The epidermis is a physiological barrier to protect organisms against environment. 

During the aging process, skin tissues undergo various changes including morphological and functional changes. 

The transcriptional regulation of genes is part of cellular reaction of aging process. 

In order to examine the changes of gene expression during the aging process, we used the primary cell culture system of human keratinocytes. 

Since UV radiation is the most important environmental skin aggressor, causing skin cancer and other problems including premature skin aging, we examined the changes of gene expression in human keratinocytes after UV irradiation using oligonucleotide microarray containing over 10,000 genes. 

We also compared the gene expression patterns of the senescent and UV treated cells. 

Expression of the variety of genes related to transcription factors, cell cycle regulation, immune response was altered in human keratinocytes. 

Some of down-regulated genes are represented in both senescent and UV treated cells. 

The results may provide a new view of gene expression following UVB exposure and aging process in human keratinocytes.

Normal human skin is covered by a multi-layered epidermis in which keratinocytes (KCs) undergo a continuous process of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis (Funchs, 1990; Dotto, 1998). 

Skin is responsible for protecting our internal organs from the toxic external world. Skin protects us from heat, cold, and physical injuries. It also provides us with sensory information about the nature of the external world and is our first defense against invasion by bacteria, viruses, and other toxic elements. 

The skin is also an excretory organ, removing toxins from the body via perspiration. 

Skin aging is characterized by various cellular and morphological changes (West, 1994; Yaar et al., 2002) that come with functional impairments such as slow wound healing (Gerstein et al., 1993), decreased protection against ultraviolet radiations (Gilchrest et al., 1982), and increased susceptibility to skin cancer (Wei, 1998). 

Most of these alterations can be related to skin senescence, which entails among others: reduced proliferation (Gerstein et al., 1993), increased oxidative stress (Chen, 2000) and reduced DNA repair capacity (Moriwaki et al., 2000). 

Cellular senescence, initially observed during subculturing of normal diploid fibroblasts, can also be induced by hyperactivation of mitogenic pathways (Serrano et al., 1997), chronic exposure to cellular stress, such as UV light, oxidative stress (Chen and Ames, 1994), or DNA damaging agents (Chang et al., 1999). 

This "premature" senescence is indistinguishable from cellular senescence induced by serial passaging of human cells, suggesting that cellular senescence represents a fate choice influenced by extracellular and intracellular signal transduction pathways.

At the molecular level, cellular senescence is controlled by the tumor suppressor protein pRb and p53 (Dimri and Campisi, 1995; Campissi, 2001). 

Inactivation of these tumor suppressors results in bypass of senescence. 

Due to its essentially irreversible growth arrest and the requirement for p53 and pRb function, cellular senescence is considered a potent tumor suppressor mechanism.

UV radiation is the most important physical carcinogen in the environment, and the skin is its main target. 

UV irradiation, especially that induced by UVB (290-320 nm), causes the initiation and promotion of skin cancers, photo-aging, and immune suppression (Kripke, 1984; Streilein et al., 1994; Fisher et al., 1997). 

UVB has been thought to play a crucial role in the photo-carcinogenesis of epidermal keratinocytes, given that it introduces various types of damage to cellular DNA. 

One of the earliest detectable responses of human skin cells to UV irradiation is activation of multiple cytokine and growth factor cell surface receptors, including epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R; Sachsenmaier et al., 1994; Warmuth et al., 1994; Fisher and Voorhees, 1998), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- a receptor (Dy etal., 1999), platelet-activating factor (PAF) receptor (Dy etal., 1999), insulin receptor (Coffer et al., 1995), interleukin (IL)-1 receptor (Rosette and Karin, 1996), and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor (Knebel etal., 1996).

More specifically, it is proposed that UV activation of membrane receptors stimulates MAP kinases signal transduction pathways, via stimulation of GTP-binging proteins including ras, rac, and cdc42. 

In support of this, activation of the three MAP kinases, ERK, Jnk, and p38 within 1hour of acute UV radiation has been demonstrated (Fisher etal., 1998). 

This activation is then succeeded by increased expression of the transcription factors c-jun and c-fos that, together with other protein factors form the transcription factor complex AP-1 (Karin and Hunter, 1995). 

Elevated levels of AP-1 are then responsible for inducing expression of key members of the MMP family responsible for the degradation of dermal matrix.

To understand the mechanisms of UV response during the aging process, we used oligonucleotide microarray technology to determine changes in gene expression in human keratinocytes after UVB treatment. 

Cultured human epidermal keratinocytes were treated with 40 mJ/cm 2 UVB, and samples were collected at 4 hours after UVB treatment. 

Also senescent cells were collected at the same time. 

Oligonucleotide microarray containing over 10,000 genes were used to quantitatively assess changes in gene expression. 

Some of regulated genes are represented both of the senescent and UV treated cells.

Primary human keratinocytes from foreskin were maintained in keratinocyte growth medium (KGM) supplemented with bovine pituitary extract, human epidermal growth factor, insulin, hydrocortisone, gentamicin, and amphotericin B (Biowhitaker). 

The culture were kept at 37°C in a 5% CO2.

For irradiation, the medium was removed and the keratinocytes treated with 40 mJ/cm 2 UVB. After irradiation, keratinocytes were rinsed with PBS and were placed in fresh medium. 

The cells maintained in culture for 4 hours. The source of UVB irradiation was a PHILIPS TL20w/01 RS.

Total RNA was isolated by using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, Inc.) following the manufacturers instruction. 

RNA was amplified and labeled with Cy3 or Cy5. Samples were hybridized to human 10k oligo chip (Macrogen). 

Prehybridization using hybridization buffer containing 4xSSC, 0.5% SDS, 0.5% BSA was performed at 42°C for 1 hour. 

Prepared probe was hybridized with chip at 42°C for 24 hours. 

After hybridization, chip was washed at room temperature for 5 minutes each in solution of wash buffer I (2x SSC/0.1% SDS), wash buffer II (1x SSC), wash buffer III (0.5% SSC), and then dried by air blower. 

Images were scanned by using Amersham Pharmacia Generation III scanner.

RT-PCR was performed with a Superscipt pre-amplification system (Life Technologies, Inc.). 

PCR was performed as follows: first, a denaturation step of 95°C for 5 minutes; second, 95°C for 1 minute; third, each annealing temperature, for 1 minute; fourth, 72°C for 1 minute; fifth, 72°C for 10 minutes. 

Amplification was performed by 27 cycles of second to fourth steps.

Detection of SA- -galactosidase (pH 6.0) was performed as described by Dimri etal. 

(1995).

Cells were washed in PBS and fixed for 5 minutes in 3% formaldehyde, resulting cells were washed and incubated 37°C with SA- -Gal staining solution (1 mg of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl- -D-galactoside/ml (Amersharm life science), 40 mM citric acid/sodium phosphate, pH 6.0, 5 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 5 mM potassium ferricyanide, 150 mM NaCI,

2 mM MgCI 2 ).

Staining was evaluated after 24 hours incubation at

37°C in CO 2 - free incubater. The stained cells were

visualized under microscope.

Imagene 4.0 (BioDiscovery) was used to analyze image

data. A three-fold difference in signal intensity between the test and control values was considered to represent a significant difference in gene expression following UVB irradiation and in that of senescence.


Primary    keratinocytes    were    serially    subcultured    as

dispersed cells in KGM until the cells reached the senescent phase (Fig. 1A). Population doubling (PD) was measured as a serial cultivation and the split ratio of 1:4 was performed. The growth of the primary keratinocytes slowed down around 12 PD and ceased at 16 PD (Fig. 1A).

Morphological change at senescent keratinocytes through microscopic observation was similar to the result previously observed (Fig. 1B). 

The senescent cells showed a flattened morphology, perinuclear vacuolization, increased cytoplasmic to nuclear ratio, and SA P-Gal expression, which are features of senescence cells previously described for primary keratinocytes (Bernard et al., 2004). In contrast, the exponential phase cells showed undifferentiated keratinocyte cell morphology and did not express detectable SA p-Gal activity. Expression of the genes involved in the senescencing process and p21 as previously described was identified by RT-PCR (Fig. 1C, D).

Oligonucleotide microarray analysis of 10,000 human genes was performed to reveal genes up-regulated or down-regulated by at least three-fold after UVB-exposure. 

The keratinocytes received 40 mJ/cm 2 UVB irradiation. 

RNA was extracted 4 hours after UVB treatment for comparative hybridization experiments. 

63 genes appeared to be up-regulated by at least three-fold (Table 2), and 82 genes appeared to be down-regulated by at least three-fold (Table 3).

The differentially expressed genes identified in this assay have been reported to function in a variety of cellular processes including cell adhesion, cell cycle, signaling, immune response, transport and other cellular functions (Table 1). 

Several genes are worthy of note due to their association with UVB irradiation and their known roles in cellular regulatory pathways that have the potential to be influenced by UVB irradiation. 

Some of those identified by the microarray were validated through RT-PCR (Fig. 2). 

Furthermore, we investigated expression of some of those at 12 hours, 24 hours after irradiation and in senescence, respectively (Fig. 3B).

SA p-Gal assays, based on the formation of a blue precipitate due to 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-p-D-galacto- pyranosidecleavage at pH 6.0, were performed on young keratinocytes and young keratinocytes incubated at 4 hours, 12 hours and 24 hours after irradiation, as well as in senescent keratinocytes. 

Numerous large cells that had accumulated the blue precipitate were found in the population of both UV-treated cells and normal senescent cells, whereas young small control cells were negative (Fig. 3A). 

Therefore, we conclude that UV irradiation provokes premature senescence in young keratinocytes.

As a biological barrier, the skin is continuously subjected to environmental stresses such as ultraviolet radiation, pathogens and thermal and chemical insults (Slominski and Wortsman, 2000). 

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun is among the most ubiquitous damaging environmental factors from which human skin must protect itself (Brunet eta/., 1999). 

UVB wavelengths are the most energetic, and are responsible for sunburn. 

UVB is directly absorbed by DNA and protein, and as such account for much of the damaging biological effects of UV irradiation including cancer and premature skin aging (Fisher etal., 1997).

To explore a role for UV irradiation in aging of skin, we used microarray technology and detected several genes with changed expression levels (up- or down-regulated) after exposure to UVB. 

As the results, 63 genes appeared to be up-regulated (Table 2), and 82 genes appeared to be down-regulated by at least three-fold (Table 3). 

Expression of the genes involved in metabolism, signaling, transcription, transport were suppressed, whereas cell cycle, immune response, cell adhesion were induced (Table 1). 

Some of gene expression was confirmed by RT-PCR, and then we compared gene expression in UVB-treated cells and the senescent cells (Fig. 2). 

Two genes of those, CHRNB2 and LGALS7 were decreased by UVB irradiation and senescence. 

The other genes were decreased by UVB irradiation, but increased in senescence. 

In previous study, LGALS7 (Galectin-7) was reported to be up-regulated in the human keratinocytes at 1 hour after UVB irradiation (Bernerd et al., 1999). 

However, in our results, LGALS7 was down- regulated in UVB-treated cells and the senescent cells. 

LGALS7 has diverse biological functions, including regulation of cell adhesion, cell growth and apoptosis (Kasai and Hirabayashi, 1996: Perillo et al., 1998; Cooper and Barondes, 1999; Liu, 2000). 

In recent study, LGALS7 exhibits pro-apoptotic function (Ichiro et al., 2002). 

However, our data demonstrate that UVB (40 mJ/cm 2 ) irradiation did not activate apoptotic pathway.

Bcl-3 (B cell CLL/lymphoma 3) is a proto-oncogene candidate. It is identified by its translocation into the immunoglobulin alpha-locus in some cases of B-cell leukemia (Franzoso et al., 1992). 

This protein functions as a transcriptional co-activator that activates through its association with NF-kappa B homodimers (Bours etal., 1993: Fujita et al., 1993). 

The expression of this gene can be induced by NF-kappa B, which forms a part of the autoregulatory loop that controls the nuclear residence of p50 NF-kappa B (Brasier etal., 2001). 

p53 represses cyclin D1 transcription through down regulation of Bcl-3 protein levels. 

UV irradiation also leads to the repression of cyclin D1and Bcl-3 (Rocha etal., 2003). 

In our study, the expression of Bcl-3 was decreased in UVB- treated cells, which was consistent with the previous study. 

However, in senescent cells, the expression of Bcl-3 was increased differently from that of UVB- treated cells in our study.

We also compared SA p-Gal activity of young keratinocytes, UV-treated keratinocytes and senescent keratinocytes. 

Numerous large cells that had accumulated the blue precipitate were found in the population of both UV-treated cells and normal senescent cells, whereas young control cells were negative (Fig. 1B and 3A).

These finding combined with our results support that the keratinocytes after UV irradiation enter the initial senescent phase and the possibility that UVB-regulated genes play an important role in skin aging.

