Single and Dual Ligand Effects on Gene Expression Changes in Mouse Macrophage Cells We identified differentially expressed genes in RAW 264.7 cells in response to single and double ligand treatments (LPS, IFNy, 2MA, LPS plus IFNy, and LPS plus 2MA). The majority of the regulated transcripts responded additively to dual ligand treatment. 

However, a significant fraction responded in a non-additive fashion. 

Several cytokines showing non-additive transcriptional responses to dual ligand treatment  also showed  non-additive protein production/secretion responses in separately performed experiments. 

Many of the genes with non-additive responses to LPS plus 2MA showed enhanced responses and encoded pro-inflammatory proteins. 

LPS plus IFNy appeared to induce both non-additive enhancement and non-additive attenuation of gene expression. 

The affected genes were associated with a variety of biological functions. 

These experiments reveal both dependent and independent regulatory pathways and point out the specific nature of the regulatory interactions.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize distinct pathogen- associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS) of Gram-negative bacteria (Akira et al., 2006). 

Binding of PAMPs to TLRs triggers a complicated series of events leading to increased expression of proinflammatory genes. 

To date, 10 human and 13 murine proteins related to the Drosophila Toll have been characterized (Kawai and Akira, 2006). 

For example, TLR2 is essential for the signaling of a variety of ligands, such as peptidoglycan, a main wall component of Gram-positive bacteria, lipopeptides and lipoproteins (Takeuchi etal., 2000). 

TLR2 cooperates with other TLR family members, TLR1 and TLR6, to discriminate among different microbial components.     

TLR3 mediates the response to double-stranded viral RNA (Alexopoulou et al., 2001). 

TLR4 is considered to be the critical component of the LPSreceptor complex (Hayashi et al., 2001; Hoshino et al., 1999; Poltorak etal., 1998). 

TLR5 binds bacterial flagellin from both Gram-positive and Gram­ negative bacteria (Hayashi et al., 2001).    

TLR9 binds unmethylated cytosine-guanosine (CpG) dinucleotide, a sequence typifying bacterial and viral DNA (Hemmi etal., 2000). 

Depending on the type of cell, TLR activation could lead to a variety of activities, such as antigen-presenting cell activation, dendritic cell maturation and B cell activation.

LPS is the major constitute of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. 

In blood, LPS forms a complex with serum protein LBP (LPS-binding protein). 

LPS binds cell surface receptor CD14 to enhance TLR4-dependent LPS recognition. 

After TLR4 forms a complex with protein MD-2, the complex is transported to the cell surface (Akira etal., 2001; Takeda etal., 2003; Yamamoto etal., 2003). 

TLR4 is a membrane protein with an extracellular leucine-rich repeat domain and a cytoplasmic TIR (Toll-like/ interleukin-1 receptor) domain. 

In addition to LPS, TLR4 recognizes several other ligands including Taxol and HSPs (heat shock proteins).

TLR4 activates two downstream pathways, MyD88- dependent pathway and MyD88-independent pathway, each of which is thought to directly activate NF k B. 

The MyD88-dependent pathway recruits the kinases, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAKI) and IRAK4, which phosphorylate TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), leading to the activation of the IKK complex. 

The MyD88-independent pathway is dependent on the TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon- p (Trif) adaptor molecule and Trif-related adaptor molecule (Tram). 

However, the genes regulated by TLR4 activation are not fully understood.

In an attempt to characterize how TLR4-mediated signal transduction can be activated by LPS, we applied LPS in the murine macrophage-like cell line RAW 264.7 for a series of time points. 

In addition, to determine whether simultaneous stimulation with two ligands had non-additive effects on gene expression in RAW cells, three ligands [LPS, IFNy and 2MA (2-methyl-thio-ATP)] which activate distinct proximal signaling pathways were used alone or in combination as dual ligands (LPS plus 2MA and LPS plus IFNy). 

Gene expression changes at multiple time points relative to the time-matched media control were determined using homemade16K oligonucleotide microarrays.

RAW 264.7 cells were treated with LPS (Sigma- Aldrich), IFNy (R & D Systems), 2MA (Sigma-Aldrich), LPS plus IFN y, and LPS plus 2MAfor up to 4 h. Cells were collected at multiple time points and RNAs were extracted. 

The same experiment was repeated three times. 

RNA samples collected at each replicate experiment were processed for microarray hybridization as described in Zhu et al. (Zhu et al., 2004). 

The expression changes in each treated RNA sample were measured with two oligonucleotide chips using the dye-swap design. 

Fig. 1 contains further details of the experimental design.

The arrays were scanned using Agilent Scanner G2505A (Agilent Technologies). 

The image files were extracted with background-subtraction (the Local background subtraction method) and dye-normalization (the Rank consistent filter and the LOWESS algorithm) using the Agilent G2566AA Extraction Software Version A.6.1.1.

Log 2 (Cy5/Cy3) readouts from each array were first filtered by several criteria to mainly remove unreliable array spots. 

For features that were control, saturated (with "glsSaturated" and "rlsSaturated" flags), non-uniform (with "glsFeatNonUnifOL" and "rlsFeatNonUnifOL" flags), or below background (with "glsWellAboveBG" and "rlsWellAboveBG" flags), their log 2 (Cy5/Cy3) value was set to blank. 

Additional filters were applied to eliminate inconsistent measurements. 

The average log 2 (treated/ media) of the pair of dye-swap measurements of a feature was set to blank if one of the measurements was blank.

Further, the average log 2 (treated/media) of the triplicate measurements of a feature was set to blank if more than one of the measurements were blank.

We limited our analysis to genes whose expression significantly changed in response to at least one of the treatments. 

We have identified differentially expressed genes using B statistics generated by the Limma package ( http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/limma/ ) (Smyth, 2004 and 2005). 

Briefly, the B statistics is the log odds of differential expression [logw (p1/p2), where p1 is the probability that the two populations are different and p2 is the probability that the two populations are the same]. 

The B statistics has been adjusted for multiple tests in Limma package. 

The greater B statistics a gene has, the greater chance a gene of differential expression. 

In general, B increases with log 2 (treated/ control).

I n the current analysis, features with B > 2 and with an average of log 2 (treated/control) > 0.75 (fold-change   of   1.7) are considered differentially expressed.

As shown in Fig. 2, single ligand treatment with LPS and IFNy for up to 4 h induced increasing numbers of gene expression changes, with approximately twice as many significant changes in LPS responses. 

2MA induced a similar number of changes as IFNy at 1 h and the number of differentially expressed features appeared to decrease with time. 

Greater numbers of differentially expressed genes were found in response to LPS plus IFNy or LPS plus 2MA than those found in single ligand responses, and this may be attributable to both additive and non-additive effects of the two single ligands.

Before we proceeded to determine the non-additive effect on gene expression of dual ligand treatment, we characterized gene expression changes in single ligand responses. 

This will allow us (a) to validate previously reported expression changes induced by the single ligands, and (b) to identify potential novel target genes of specific signaling pathways if the genes co-cluster with well-characterized known targets. 

Information of the latter kind can be useful in identifying pathway interaction mechanisms if some of the novel targets are affected non-additively by dual ligand treatments.

We used hierarchical clustering to characterize patterns of gene expression changes. 

Clustering was done across the features with experimental conditions aligned according to the order of time points. 

Euclidean correlation coefficient and complete linkage were used as similarity metrics. 

The hierarchical clustering program used is implemented in the Multiple Experiment Viewer ( http://www.tigr.org/software/tm4/mev.html ). 

Single ligand treatment with LPS, IFNy, and 2MA all induced strong expression changes as early as 1 h (Fig. 3). 

As shown in Fig. 3, additional expression changes were induced at 2 h and 4 h in LPS and IFNy responses, and many 2MA- induced changes were transient and subsided with time.

A number of the known LPS- or IFNy- regulated genes showed expected expression changes in our experiment. 

As shown in Fig. 4A, known direct target genes of the MyD88-NFi<B pathway activated by LPS through the TLR4, such as TNFa, IL1J3 and Mail, were strongly induced at 0.5 h, while Csf2, Csf3, IL6 and Cebpb, the known transcription targets of Mail, were induced later at 1 h or2 h (Kawai, 2001; Yamamoto et al., 2004). 

Similarly, known primary target genes of another pathway activated by LPS, the Myd88-independent IRF3 pathway, such as Irg1, IP-10, Rantes, Ifitl, Ifnb and Isg15, were induced at 0.5 h or 1 h, while Mx1 and Irf7, genes induced by secreted Ifnb, were up regulated later by LPS at 2 h and 4 h, respectively (Fig. 4B) (Doyle et al., 2002; Hoshino et al., 2002). 

As shown in Fig. 4C, several reported IFNy -induced immediate early genes regulated by the STAT 1 pathway, such as Irf 1, Icsbpl, Stat2, IP-10 and Ifitl, also increased their expression significantly at 1 h [reviewed in (Boehm et al., 1997)]. 

We also found several known MAPK-induced genes, such as Egr1, Egr2, and Dusp2, in clusters of early induced genes by 2MA (Fig. 4D).

We computed the net expression fold-change in response to each single ligand and to dual ligand treatment at each time point for each gene using the average of the triplicate log 2 -ratio measurements after filtering as follows: (1) Sets that do not have at least two data points are not used (e.g., blank, blank, 2). (2) If two of the triplicates show different signs and have a standard deviation above 0.5, the data is not used (e.g., -2,2, 0.5). (3) If one data set shows more than a 2 fold difference (log 2 ratio of 1) and the other points do not, that data is not used, unless the standard deviation is less than 0.5. (e.g., 3, 0.2, 0.2) (4) The remaining data points are averaged and used in the analysis. 

The difference between the fold-change induced by dual ligand and the sum of fold-changes induced by single ligands was used as a measure of the non-additive effect (Fig. 5).

We then added the fold-change differences at 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h together, and used the resulting sum to rank genes in descending order. 

In the current analysis, we generally considered genes that ranked at the top (the sum being positive) as candidates whose expression was enhanced non-additively by the dual ligands, and genes that ranked at the bottom (the sum being negative) as candidates whose expression was attenu­ ated non-additively by the dual ligand treatments. 

Tables 1-4 showed gene expression changes (as average Iog2-ratios) of the single time point and the sum fold-change differences of these top/bottom ranked genes in responses to LPS + IFNy or LPS + 2MA. 

Table 1 listed genes whose expression was enhanced non- additively by LPS + IFNy. Non-additively enhanced genes including IL6 and IL10 were also measured in cytokine secretion assays. 

Secreted IL6 in response to LPS + IFNy was clearly non-additively enhanced at 4 h and a slight non-additive effect was seen in IL10 production at 4 h (data not shown). 

Other interesting genes including Sgk, Nolal, Crabp2, and Fst did not show significant changes at most time points in response to either LPS or IFNy, but showed strong changes when LPS and IFNy were applied together. 

Whether these changes are reflected at the protein level, what mechanisms underlie the changes, and the nature of the biological significance of these changes remain to be seen. 

Similar results are found in Tables 2-4. 

Socsl- and Cish-mediated feedback inhibition and PGE2 (prostaglandin E2) negative feedback seem to attenuate the transcriptional responses to LPS plus IFN7 (Table 1). 

The increased number of less-than-additive transcriptional changes induced by LPS plus IFN7 at 4 h (Table 2) was preceded by a significant induction of Socsl and Cish (Table 1), genes encoding putative inhibitors of LPS, and Ptgs2 and Ptger4, genesencoding COX-2 and EP4, an enzyme and a receptor for the synthesis and binding of PGE2, respectively.

In response to LPS plus 2MA, the enhancement of LPS-induced expression of IFNp at 1 h and 2 h (Table 3) was followed by the increased expression of multiple interferon induced genes, such as Gbp2, Irf1, Mx1, and Mx2, and the attenuation of LPS-induced expression of IL10 at 1 h and 2 h (Table 4) correlated with the increased expression of IL10 repressed genes later at 4   h including IL1a, IL1p, IL6, IL18, Pim1, and Socsl.    

It can be hypothesized that 2MA-induced Ca 2+ mobilization activates NFAT, and NFAT synergizes with IRF3 activated by LPS in the transcriptional induction of IFNp. 

Consistent with this possibility, the 5’ upstream region of the mouse and human IFNp genes have a NFAT site, an IRF site overlapped with the NFAT site, and a NF k B site. 

The IRF site and the NF k B site mediate IFNp transcriptional activation by IRF3 and NF k B in response to LPS (Doyle et al., 2002).

In summary, analysis of gene expression response to single ligands allowed us to identify expression changes indicative of the activation of specific signaling pathways (Fig. 6). 

While genes showing such changes include known target genes of the pathway, novel target genes were also found. 

Computational analysis of transcriptional regulatory pathways activated by various ligands, such as TLR ligands, with palpable waves of transcription will not only reveal the independent pathway of each ligand but also give further ideas of cross signaling networks within or with other signal transduction pathways by further exploring the data.
