The Ribonucleotide reductases(RNR) are essential enzymes that catalyze the conversion of nucleotides to deoxynucleotides in DNA replication and repair in all living organisms.

The RNRs operate by a free radical mechanism but differ in the composition of subunit, cofactor required and regulation by allostery.

Based on these differences the RNRs are classified into three classesclass I, class II and class III which depend on oxygen, adenosylcobalamin and S-adenosylmethionine with an iron sulfur cluster respectively for radical generation.

In this article thirty seven sequences belonging to each of the three classes of RNR were analyzed by using various tools of bioinformatics.

Phylogenetic analysis, dot-plot comparisons and motif analysis was done to identify a number of differences in the three classes of RNRs.

In this research article, we have attempted to decipher evolutionary relationship between the three classes of RNR by using bioinformatics approach.

The Ribonucleotide reductases are enzymes with a complex structure which are present in all cellular organisms : bacteria, viruses, eukaryotes and archaea.

The Ribonucleotide reductase catalyses the reduction of ribonucleotide diphosphate to deoxyribonucleoside, which are precursors for the essential steps for DNA repair and replication(Jordan and Reichard, 1998).

The ribonucleotide reductases are divided into 3 classesI, II and III.

All the 3 classes carry out the reduction reaction by free radical chemistry and involve proteins with free radical amino acids.

However the metallocofactor required for initiation of the reduction reaction and requirement for oxygen varies(Sjöberg B-M, 1997).

Class I RNRs are aerobic and function strictly in the presence of oxygen for the production of tyrosyl radical by a di-iron center.

Escheriachia Coli was the microorganism from which the first reductase was characterized and has become the prototype of class I(Fontecave et al., 1992).

The E.coli class I reductase is a hetero tetramer(α2β2) made up of two homodimer protein called NrdA(α2) and NrdB(β2)(Nordlund and Reichard, 2006; Torrents et al., 2007).

The β2 polypeptide contains the tyrosyl radical.

The class I RNR is further subdivided into Ia and Ib class on the basis of allostery and identity of sequence.

Class Ia is encoded by nrdAB gene and class Ib is encoded by the nrdEF gene.

Class II RNR is best characterized from Lactobacillus leichmannii(Blakley, 1978; Booker & Stubbe, 1993; Panagou et al., 1972).

The class II RNRs consists of a single subunit(mostly α2 homodimer) encoded by nrdJ genes and require adenosylcobalamin(AdoCbl) for radical generation.

This process does not require oxygen.

Hence class II RNR can work under aerobic as well as anaerobic conditions(Nordlund and Reichard, 2006; Torrents et al., 2007).

The class III RNR generate glycyl radical by using S-adenosylmethionine(SAM) as a cofactor and NrdG protein as an activator.

It consists of α2β2 heterodimer which is encoded by the nrdDG genes.

The class III is represented by the anaerobic RNR of E.coli(Ollagnier et al., 1996).

The class I RNR genes are encoded by most Eukaryotic organisms whereas a few bacteria and archaea have genes encoding two or all three RNRs(Jordan et al., 1999).

All three RNRs operate by a radical mechanism.

Also in all three RNRs each of the four ribonucleotides are reduced by a single enzyme.

The substrate specificity is determined by allosteric effect due to binding of nucleoside triphosphate to a particular site which is different from the catalytic site.

This specific site binding is a property is unique to RNRs(Jordan and Reichard, 1998).

The class Ia RNRs also has an activity site which controls the overall activity of the enzyme using ATP regardless of the specificity.

Considering the different metallocofactors required by different classes of RNRs it seems that the three classes of RNRs evolved independently.

Despite these differences the similar catalytic mechanism of all the three classes of RNR and presence of ribonucleotide seems to suggest that they evolved from a common ancestor(Reichard, 1997; Stubbe et al., 2001).

Also the evolution of different enzymes at different times brings forward a possibility that the original RNR is a ribozyme and not a protein(Benner et al., 1989).The evolution of the three classes of Ribonucleotide reductase has always been an enigma with a few suggesting convergent evolution whereas a few suggesting divergent evolution.

In this article, we analyze the sequences of the three classes of RNRs, to answer this question, using a number of bioinformatics tools.

The RNR sequences for analysis were obtained from the NCBI website(http : //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).

The class of each of RNR sequence was reconfirmed by using RNR db a specialized database for RNR, which can be accessed at http : //rnrdb.molbio.su.se.

Out of several available RNR sequences, we selected only the bacterial and archaeal sequences and excluded viruses and eukaryotes.

A total of 37 sequences representing the core enzyme of the three classes of RNRs were meticulously chosen based on their size, genetic composition, radical chemistry, cofactor requirement and organism origin.

We obtained fourteen sequences of bacteria belonging to Class Iseven sequences representing class Ia and seven sequences representing class Ib.

We obtained ten sequences of class II which had both bacterial as well as archaeal sequences.

Class III was represented by thirteen bacterial sequences.

Until now, various hypotheses regarding the evolution of three classes of RNR have been proposed.

Here, for the first time we tried to analyze the evolution of the 3 classes of RNRs using bioinformatics.

MEME Motif discovery tool was used to identify the similar motifs in each of the sequences.

All the settings were set to default, except for the maximum number of Motifs which was increased from three to ten(Bailey et al., 2006).

The phylogenetic tree and the motif analysis were then used to construct dot plots.

The position of a specific amino acid motif in the selected protein sequence was found by dot plots.

In order to compare the similarity as well as difference in the sequences of each class of RNR the dot matcher program was used to construct dot plots.

The similarity in the protein sequences can be easily assessed from dot plots simply by seeing a diagonal fragment in between the X and Y axis of a graph, which is constructed by using data matrix, distance matrix and chi squared analysis(Landes et al., 1998).

Thus similar sequence show a diagonal line whereas this line is absent or highly fragmented in dissimilar sequences.

We first constructed dot plots by using sequences belonging to the same class of RNR and then by using each sequence from a different class, using different combinations of class each time.

The parameters of the program were mostly set at default except for window size of 10 and a threshold of 23(Rice and Longden, 2000).

The selected sequences were obtained in FASTA format and then aligned by using Clustal X(Thompson et al., 1997).

Neighbour joining method was used to construct the phylogenetic tree from the sequences which were aligned using PHYLIP(Felsenstein, 1989).

The phylogenetic tree was then bootstrapped in order to see how well the sequences related to each other.

Finally treeview was used to see their position in each clade and study if the RNR sequences were related by evolution(Page et al., 1996).

Analysis of RNR motifs in class I, class II and Class III of RNR reveals the distinct features in all the three classes of RNRs(Fig.1).

The RNR of class Ia and Ib share Motif 2 and Motif 8.

These two motifs are present in sequences 1(Methylobacillus flagellatus KT) through 14(Mycoplasma pneumoniae M12).

Motif 5 is present in all bacteria of only class Ia and three bacterial sequences of class Ib:11(Corynebacterium ammoniagenes), 12(Salmonella enterica subsp.

enterica serovar Typhimurium str.LT2) and 13(Escherichia coli 536).

Motif 1, 3, 6 and 10 are present in sequences 1(Methylobacillus flagellatus KT) through 24(Streptomyces griseus subsp.

griseus NBRC 13350) which incorporates all the sequences from class I and class II.

Motif 7 and Motif 9 are present in sequences belonging to class I, class II and a few sequences of class III.

Motif 7 is present in sequences from 1(Methylobacillus flagellatus KT) through 32(Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 20016) with the exception of sequence 27(Corynebacterium efficiens YS-314) whereas Motif 9 is seen in sequences 1 through 25(Streptococcus pyogenes M1 GAS) except sequence 14, sequences 30(Streptococcus sanguinis SK36) and sequence 31(Streptococcus pneumoniae ATCC 700669).

However, there is no motif that is common to all members belonging to class III RNR.

The degree of similarity between the protein sequences of the three classes of RNR 's can be easily seen by comparing the dot plots in Fig.The dot plots constructed with sequences belonging to same class shows a linear graph whereas dot plots constructed in between two classes show a high degree of dissimilarity.

Dot plots constructed even within two subclasses of the same class : class Ia and class Ib resulted in noncollinear multiple fragments.

These findings match with the motifs discovered which are shared only between a particular class.

As seen in Fig.3 below phylogenetic analysis of the three classes of RNRs resulted in the formation of a tree with three distinct clades for class I, class II and class III RNRs.

Class I is further subdivided into two clades : class Ia and class Ib.

The bootstrap value for class I, class II and class III RNRs are mostly above ninety and from the tree we can infer that all the three classes of RNR share a common ancestor.

As seen in Fig.3, the lower bootstrap score is only seen between Clostridium difficile 630 and Deinococcus radiodurans R1 both belonging to RNR class Ib.

Clostridium difficile 630 by its spore forming ability is highly resistant whereas Deinococcus radiodurans R1 is radio resistant.

These bacteria have adapted themselves to new environments which other bacteria and archaea were not able to propagate and this fact is reflected in the RNR sequence of these bacteria and the evolutionary distance in the phylogenetic tree.

The three classes of RNR share a common ancestor and each class evolved independently from each other before the tree of life diversified(Torrents et al., 2002).

The multiple sequence alignment which was performed on 37 bacterial and archaeal sequences representing all 3 classes of RNRs gives sufficient evidence to conclude that they all have a common evolutionary origin.

The phylogenetic tree shows three distinct clades for each class of RNR, thus providing a definitive evidence of common ancestral origin of all classes of RNRs with divergent evolution.

All the three classes of RNRs synthesize deoxyribonucleotides by catalyzing the disruption of 2 ’ carbon-hydroxyl bond to form 2 ’ carbon hydrogen bond.

The solvent provides the hydrogen, which replaces the hydroxyl while retaining the overall configuration(Licht et al., 1999).Using the prototype for class I(Escheriachia Coli) and Class II(Lactobacillus leichmannii) enzymes the radical mechanism of ribonucleotide reduction can be described in brief as follows((Blakley, 1978; Booker & Stubbe, 1993; Fontecave et al., 1992; Panagou et al., 1972).

The Cys439 of the E.coli or Cys408 of the L.leichmannii has a thiyl radical.

The thiyl radical creates an active substrate radical by removing hydrogen from C-3 ’.

Two redox active cysteines(Cys 225 and Cys462 in E.coli and Cys119 and Cys 419 in L.leichmannii) reduce the active substrate radical(Reichard, 1997; Stubbe et al., 2001).

The thiyl radical is generated from the tyrosyl radical in presence of oxygen linked di iron center in class I RNR and from adenosylcobalamin in class II RNR.

Class III RNR has glycyl radical as stable radical on the large subunit and has 4Fe-4S cluster and requires S-adenosylmethionine for radical generation(Ollagnier et al., 1996).

Indirect evidence suggesting participation of cysteines and thiyl radical in reduction of the ribose ring in class III RNR also occurs(Uhlin et al., 1994).

So similar catalytic mechanism suggests a common ancestory.

The level of deoxyribonucleotides is maintained by regulation of RNRs by allosteric as well as transcription regulatory mechanism.

Allosteric control is achieved by binding of nucleoside triphosphates to a specificity site on the substrate which is distinct from the active site along with binding of ATP or dATP to active site causing stimulation or inhibition respectively, and thus controlling the overall activity of the enzyme(Nordlund and Reichard, 2006).

In the past few years NrdR, which was first described in Streptomyces coelicolor(Borovak et al., 2004) is being suggested as a novel global regulator controlling the expression of nrd genes in all three classes of RNRs.

It has been reported that in a variety of microorganisms a putative NrdR box is present upstream of nrd genes from all three classes of RNRs(Rodionov et al., 2005).

NrdR has an ATP cone which is similar to the RNR class I and III allosteric activity site; suggesting intracellular ATP/dATP pools acting as a stimulus for NrdR for regulation of nrd expression(Aravind et al., 2000).

The analysis of the different motifs show that class I has unique motifs 2 and 8 which are absent in the two other classes of RNRs.

Class I and II do share Motifs 1, 3, 6 and 10 providing evidence that class I and II are more closely related than class III.

Also, a unique motif present in only class III RNR sequences is nonexistent.

Motif 5 is peculiar as it is present in all bacteria and archaea belonging to class Ia.

However it is present in only sequences 11 through 13 of class Ib and excludes sequences 8, 9, 10 and 14.

Deinococcus radiodurans R1 and Clostridium difficile 630 are highly resistant organisms and probably evolved and adapted to certain environments which other bacteria and archaea were not able to propagate and hence lack motif 5.

The same fact is further highlighted by low bootstrap scores of these two bacteria in phylogenetic analysis.

Mycoplasma genitalium G3 and Mycoplasma pneumoniae M129 have nrdF sequences that have a Val, Pro and Lys instead of Glu98, Glu157 and Glu192 respectively(Eriksson et al., 1998).

This explains absence of Motif 5 in these two bacteria.

The dot-plots which were used as a comparative tool between two sequences showed a high degree of similarity within members of the same class.

However dot plots between members of different classes just resulted in multiple fragments without solid collinear lines suggesting no similarity between sequences of different classes.

These results are consistent even with Motif analysis.

In conclusion, we can say that the three classes of RNRs have a common ancestor yet they evolved separately.

In this study by comparing the organization of motifs, the protein sequences, dot plots and phylogenetic analysis we can see a clear picture of the differences in the three classes of RNRs and their evolution.

The ability of Ribonucleotide reductases to convert nucleotides to deoxynucleotides has made them a potential target for designing antitumor(Plunkett et al., 1996) and antiviral drugs(Duan et al., 1998).

In this study we considered only bacterial and archaeal sequences.

Further research may be done by comparing all classes of RNRs in archaea, bacteria and Eukarya to get a more comprehensive picture of the evolution of the Ribonucleotide reductase.

This knowledge will be useful to ascertain the role played by RNRs in linking the DNA and RNA world.

