Prediction Model for the Cellular Immortalization and Transformation Potentials of Cell Substrates The establishment of DNA microarray technology has enabled high-throughput analysis and molecular profiling of various types of cancers. 

By using the gene expression data from microarray analysis we are able to investigate diagnostic applications at the molecular level. 

The most important step in the application of microarray technology to cancer diagnostics is the selection of specific markers from gene expression profiles. 

In order to select markers of immortalization and transformation we used c-myc and H-ras oncogene-transfected NIH3T3 cells as our model system. 

We have identified 8751 differentially expressed genes in    the immortalization/transformation model by multivariate    permutation F-test (95% confidence, FDR <0.01). 

Using the support vector machine algorithm, we selected 13 discriminative genes which could be used to predict immortalization and transformation with perfect accuracy. 

We assayed H- ras -transfected “transformed” cells to validate our immortalization/transformation classification system. 

The selected molecular markers generated valuable additional information for tumor diagnosis, prognosis and therapy development.

Cell    substrates    can    be    used    to    produce recombinant vaccines or proteins for therapeutics. Although the number of residual cells, substrates and adventitious materials is usually minimal in the final products, we need to check whether these substances can lead to transformation and tumors in recipients. 

To check the tumorigenic potential of cell substrates, it is necessary to check the tumorigenicity in vivo using immunocomprimized animal models such as Balb/c-nu    mice.    

However,    these    methods    are    time consuming and expensive making it impractical to test cell substrates candidates in this way. 

By using biomarkers for cellular    transformation    we    can    classify    cell    substrates according to their transforming potentials without the need for costly animal testing.

Normal diploid cells can divide a limited number of times before entering into an irreversible growth arrest termed replicative senescence (Hayflick, 1965). 

A small percentage of cells can acquire unlimited proliferation potential, which is a key step in tumorigenesis (Greider, 1999). 

Telomerase activity has been reported to be sufficient to immortalize human diploid fibroblasts (Bodnar et al., 1998), while other studies have shown that the c~myc oncogene fulfils many of the criteria for a gene involved in the immortalization of human epithelial cells (Bouchard et al., 1998).

Signaling from the small GTPase, Ras, has been under intense investigation over the past decade due to its involvement in mediating the pathways that control transcriptional activation. 

The pathways include mediators of critical and diverse cellular functions such as proliferation, development, differentiation, and apoptosis (Ayllon and Rebollo, 2000). 

Mutations conferring constitutive activation of Ras occur frequently in many types of human cancers (Bos, 1989). 

Signaling pathways downstream of Ras have been fairly well defined, and their contribution to Ras- mediated transformation has been studied extensively.

With    the    aim    of    reconstructing    tumorigenesis,    we have used mouse fibroblast NIH3T3 cells to establish models for immortalization and transformation by c~myc and/or H-ras V12 . 

The gene expression profiles of these cells were analyzed by Affymetrix microarray to find differentially expressed genes in each group. 

Finally, we selected    13    genes    which    could    be    used    to    predict whether    the    tested    cells    were    normal,    immortalized    or transformed with one hundred percent accuracy. 

These genes and algorithm may be useful in the classification of cell substrates to predict their transforming potential without the need for in vivo tumorigenicity assays.

NIH3T3     mouse     fibroblast     cells     were     maintained in MEM    supplemented    with    10% FBS    and    antibiotics    of penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with a 5% CO 2 atmosphere. 

We established stable NIH3T3(c-myc)    cell    lines    by    transfecting    NIH3T3    cells with      pcDNAc-myc      using      Lipofectamine      (Invitrogen, USA)    and    selecting    stable    transfectants    with    Geneticin (Invitrogen,    USA).    

The    other    cell    lines    like    NIH3T3(H- ras V12 )     and     NIH3T3(c-myc+H-ras V12 )     were     established using     the     same     procedure.     

The     expressions     of transgenes was checked by Western blot analysis (data not shown), and the in vitro and in vivo transformation potential of cells was checked using soft agar assays and by tumor formation assays in Balb/c-nu mouse, respectively.

Total RNAs from cells was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen Inc., USA) and purified by column chromatography (RNeasy, Qiagen) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer. 

The quality of RNA was checked by quantifying 260/280 and 260/230 ratios and by gel electrophoresis     (data     not     shown).     

Following     ethanol precipitation, RNA was stored at -80 °C after ethanol precipitation. 

Labeling and hybridization was performed as described in Affymetrix microarray protocol (Kim et al., 2004). 

The array used in this experiment was Affymetrix mouse genome 430 2.0 array which includes 39,000 transcripts. 

Many experiments for control, c-myc, H-ras V12 , and c-myc+H-ras V12 microarray experiment were quadruplicated producing a total of 16 sets of microarray data.

Fluorescence    intensity    was    processed    and    measured using GeneChip scanner 3000 and intensity data was imported to an in-house microarray database. 

In order to normalize data and remove systemic variance, RMA (Robust Multi Array Average) normalization was applied to remove systematic variance (Irizarry et al., 2003). 

The application of RMA allowed the raw intensity values to be background corrected, Iog2 transformed and then quantile normalized. 

A linear model was fitted to the normalized data to obtain an expression measurement for each probe set on each array.

To characterize the differences between immortalized and transformed cells, we identified genes that were differentially expressed among control, immortalized (c- myc), and transformed (c-myc+H-ras V12 ) classes using the multivariate permutation F-test (Simon etal., 2004; Korn et al., 2004). 

The false discovery rate (FDR) was defined as the proportion of genes reported to be differentially expressed by our assay that were false positives. 

We used the    multivariate    permutation    test    to    provide    a    95% confidence level where the false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1%.

Gene ontology (GO) (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2000) groups of the selected genes were identified. 

This GO analysis was performed to provide information regarding whether the list of significant genes selected by the analysis was different to a randomly generated list selected from all genes in a given GO category. 

This type of analysis is different from a simple annotation of a gene list using GO categories. 

The data was expressed as the observed vs. the expected ratio where the observed was defined as the number of genes in the list of significant genes which fell into a GO category. 

The expected was defined as the average number of genes    which    would    be    expected    to    fall into that GO category in a subset of genes randomly selected from all genes in the analysis. 

A GO category consisted of not only the genes which were described by that GO term, but also any gene which was described by any members of that GO term.

We also developed models to predict the class for samples, where the gene ontology is unknown. 

Although the 95% confidence with FDR<0.01 was a strict constraint, the selected genes were too numerous to construct    a    prediction    model.    

We    performed    another feature selection step to obtain compact gene sets for an optimal     prediction     model. 

Particularly,     we used a method     of gene     selection utilizing     support vector methods    (SVM)    (Vapnik,    1998)    based    on    recursive feature    elimination    (RFE)    (Guyon    et    al.,    2002).    

Gene selection    with    SVM    based    on    RFE    eliminates    gene redundancy    automatically    and    yields    better    and    more compact gene subsets. 

We also developed a prediction model using the Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) algorithm with a logistic regression model and RBF kernel    (Platt,    1998)    incorporating    the    genes    that    were selected    by    SVM    based    on    RFE.    

We    estimated    the prediction error of each model using leave-one-out cross -validation (LOOCV), which is a special case of n-fold cross-validation, where n is the number of samples in the dataset (Tan et al., 2005). 

LOOCV has the advantage of utilizing    as    much    data    as    possible    for    training.    

In addition, the test sets were mutually exclusive, and they effectively covered the entire dataset. 

LOOCV provided a method which maximized the data obtained from a small dataset and while generating as accurate an estimate as possible (Tan et al., 2005).

NIH3T3 mouse fibroblast cells can be maintained in monolayer cells, but it cannot be grown in soft agar. 

To establish    models    for    immortalization    and    transformation, we introduced c~myc and H-ras V12 expression plasmid to NIH3T3 cells and selected stable cell colonies as reported previously (Wiehle et al., 1990). 

The tumorigenic potential of      NIH3T3,      NIH3T3(c-myc),      NIH3T3(H-ras V12 )     and NIH3T3(c-myc+H-ras V12 )    cells were checked using the colony formation in soft agar and tumor formation in vivo in Balb/c-nu mice (Table 1). 

We compared the tumorigenicity using Vero and HeLa cells as negative and positive Table 1. 

In vitro and in vivo tumorigenicity assay for NIH3T3, NIH3T3(c-myc), NIH3T3(H-rasV12) and NIH3T3(c-myc+H- rasV12) cells.

controls,    respectively.    

Immortalized    cells    could    form    a colony in in vitro tumorigenicity assay, but not tumor mass in in vivo tumorigenicity assay, while NIH3T3(H-ras V12 ) and NIH3T3(c-myc+H-ras V12 ) cells could make massive tumor in vivo as well as in vitro.

We    identified    8,751    differentially    expressed    genes    from control, immortalized, and transformed cells through multivariate permutation F-test with 95% confidence and 1 % false discovery rate. 

Upon analysis of the distribution of those genes along the chromosomes, we did not find any preferential locus among 20 chromosomes of the mouse genome (Fig. 1). 

These results may indicate that the transcriptional regulations of immortalization and transformation do not ioverlab.

To identify the characteristics of the 8,751 genes, we performed gene ontology analysis based on observed vs. expected ratio. 

Our analysis showed statistically overrepresented GO terms within a group of genes (Table 2). 

Five categories of gene ontology were related to differentially expressed genes in the immortalization/ transformation model. 

Oxidoreductase activity, especially related to superoxide radicals, was altered in our model. 

This is likely to be important in DNA damage and mutagenesis. 

In addition, the genes identified that have nucleotide kinase activity are likely to be important in aberrant DNA synthesis and metabolism predisposing cells to transformation. 

One of the most interesting categories deleted involved stem cell factor receptor binding which may be representative of cancer cell de­ differentiation in our model.

We have picked several genes out of the DEG lists to explain the effects of each oncogenes. 

In particular, we tested four genes, which have been reported to be targets of c-myc transcriptional regulation. 

All of these genes were up- or down regulated by the expression of c-myc (Fig. 2), however, the expression of all four genes was also affected by the ectopic expression of H-ras V12 . 

In the cases of Mina and    Duspl,    H-ras V12    induced    the    expression    of    target genes at the level of c-myc-dependent regulation. The induction of Thbsl by H-ras V12 was higher than that observed for c-myc. More interestingly, the transcription of Gadd45a bias been shown to be suppressed by c-myc, while H-ras    v   12   could up-regulate Gadd45a expression. The effect of H-ras V12 was sufficient to overcome the suppression by c-myc and up-regulate the expression of Gadd45a in cells expressing both c-myc and H-ras   V12 . Although we picked only four genes from the DEG list, the information on gene expression revealed many interesting

regulatory relationships between different oncogenes.

To obtain small sets of discriminative genes, we performed an additional feature subset selection process using linear SVM based on RFE and discovered 13 informative genes (Table 3). 

We constructed a prediction model using the SMO algorithm with a logistic regression model and the radial basis function (RBF)-kemel. 

The performance of the prediction model was assessed using LOOCV and was found to be one hundred percent accurate for the data analyzed. 

We also validated our prediction model using microarray data from four H-ras-transfected transformed cell lines and they were correctly classified as a transformed class.

In order to visualize selected biomarkers, we performed hierarchical clustering of 13 gene with average linkage and Manhattan distance measures for a total 16 sets of microarray data (Fig. 3). 

The heat map illustrated that data from H-ras v12 -transfected transformed cell (H-ras V12 ) data were closely clustered with c-myc+H-ras vi2 calss.

We have created composite profiles for an in vitro immortalization and transformation model, which was confirmed    by    in    vivo    tumorigenecity    assays.    

Using    the multivariate    permutation    F-test    (95%    confidence,    FDR <0.01), we found 8,751 differentially expressed genes for our     immortalization/transformation     model.     

In     c-myc- transfected “immortalized” cells, we found signatures of known immortalization markers related to telomere and transforming growth factor signaling. 

A comparison of the known targets for c-myc revealed that many were also regulated by H-ras V12 . 

In the case of Gadd45a, c-myc alone could suppress its expression while the co-expression of H-ras V12 caused a reversal of this suppression. 

To enhance the power of analysis of this sysem, more profiles on cell lines and cancer tissues need to be divulged. 

Based on the wrapper approach we were able to select 13 genes to establish a prediction model for immortalization and transformation, which gave perfect accuracy in calssifying H-ras v12 -transfected cells as a transformed class.
