Single-Cell Sequencing in Cancer: Recent Applications to Immunogenomics and Multi-omics Tools
Tumor heterogeneity, the cellular mosaic of multiple lineages arising from the process of clonal evolution, has continued to thwart multi-omics analyses using traditional bulk sequencing methods. The application of single-cell sequencing, in concert with existing genomics methods, has enabled high-resolution interrogation of the genome, transcriptome, epigenome, and proteome. Applied to cancers, these single-cell multi-omics methods bypass previous limitations on data resolution and have enabled a more nuanced understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of tumor progression, immune evasion, metastasis, and treatment resistance. This review details the growing number of novel single-cell multi-omics methods applied to tumors and further discusses recent discoveries emerging from these approaches, especially in regard to immunotherapy.
The advent of genomic medicine has bolstered the appreciation of heterogeneity between and, especially, within tumors. This cellular heterogeneity plays a major role in tumor progression and sensitivity to anti-tumor therapies [1, 2], thereby posing a significant challenge to personalized cancer therapy. With continuing advances in high-throughput single-cell sequencing technology [3, 4], we are now able to interrogate at high resolution the genomic features of both the malignant cells and the immune cells residing within the tumor microenvironment [5–7] to better understand what promotes evasion from growth suppression and cell death signals. Given the extremely heterogenous nature of tumors and the equally diverse immune repertoire in a population, single-cell sequencing provides information that bulk sequencing cannot, such as intratumoral heterogeneity [8, 9], clonal evolution [4, 10, 11], tumor microenvironment remodeling status [7, 12], and development of cancer therapy resistance [13]. This information will be invaluable in the effort to predict targetable mechanisms of resistance to cancer immunotherapy, a revolutionary cancer treatment that harnesses the immune system to battle a wide range of tumor types including melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and non-small cell lung cancer [14]. Understanding tumor heterogeneity via single-cell sequencing has implications for the identification of biomarkers for cancer and could help uncover approaches to delay or reverse acquired resistance.
Multi-omics is an umbrella term to describe multi-dimensional analytical methods that integrate high-throughput biomolecule data from multiple sources, such as the genome (via whole genome sequencing), transcriptome (via RNA-Seq), proteome (via liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry), interactome (via genome-wide chromosome conformation capture [Hi-C]), epigenome (via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing [ChIP-Seq], Bisulfite-Seq, or assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing [ATAC-Seq]), and metabolome (via mass spectrometry [MS]) [15]. Integration of multiple biomolecular datasets is particularly relevant to the investigation of factors driving tumorigenesis and metastasis since malignancy can arise from the concomitant effects of mild perturbations within interlinked homeostatic networks that may individually go unnoticed [16]. With the advent of single-cell sequencing approaches, multi-omics methods can be applied to better understand the complex interactions and connections in cell state and phenotype in the cancer ecosystem and explore cellular heterogeneity that often confounds biomolecular variation from multi-omics approaches in bulk [17].
This review presents the perspectives of single-cell genomic analysis in cancer immunology, the potential pitfalls of different single-cell analysis technology, and the therapeutic opportunity for cancer treatment as the hallmarks of precision medicine in the future.
A tumor is a complex ecosystem containing an extensive admixture of different cell types, states, and fates. Tumors begin as a single cell but, during the process of tumor progression, accumulate somatic mutations and diversify to form distinct lineages and subclonal populations. This intratumor heterogeneity, and the clonal evolution that results, plays a critical role in many processes such as immune evasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. This heterogeneity poses a major challenge for genomic analysis by conventional bulk sequencing which typically measures the average signal from an ensemble of cells and is thus a confounding factor in clinical diagnosis and therapeutic treatment of patients.
Understanding genomic alterations at single-cell resolution allows the accurate identification of clonal lineages that favored proliferation despite treatment. To date, most single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-Seq) studies of cancer have focused on intratumor heterogeneity and clonal evolution in primary tumors. One of the first studies to use scDNA-Seq to examine aneuploidy evolution in individual cells from triple-negative breast cancer patients found punctuated copy number evolution that was followed by stable clonal expansion [18]. More recently, a study investigated the genomic evolution of single cells in triple-negative breast cancer patients who were treated with chemotherapy and found two distinct subclonal populations that were undergoing extinction and persistence [19].
Among the many single-cell sequencing approaches, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has been the most widely used technique and has been demonstrated to be both accurate and scalable. As a result, scRNA-Seq has already had a great impact on improving our fundamental understanding of intratumor heterogeneity [8, 9, 20, 21], clonal evolution [10, 19, 21], and metastatic dissemination [21] in tumors. Previously, application of scRNA-Seq was limited to the interrogation of features on tumor-associated factors, including tumoral somatic mutation burden, neoantigen load, and PD-L1 expression. Recently, however, scRNA-Seq has been used to interrogate immune-related factors in both tumor cells and microenvironment. In a series of studies, scRNA-Seq was used in combination with tumor spatial heterogeneity analysis to profile the mechanisms of cancer-associated immunosuppression on tumor-infiltrating T-cell dysfunction [22, 23], immunosuppressive tumoral T cells [23], and macrophages [24]. An analysis of melanomas via scRNA-Seq revealed spatial and functional heterogeneity in both the tumor and T cells and further demonstrated the range of T-cell activation, clonal expansion, and exhaustion programs within the tumor [6]. Another study used scRNA-Seq to determine the immune landscape of melanoma patients treated with checkpoint inhibitors and identified two major cell states. One state was similar to that of stem-cell-like memory CD8 T cells and was predominantly found in tumors that responded to treatment, whereas the other state was similar to dysfunctional or exhausted T cells and was commonly seen in resistant tumors [25]. In a further study, scRNA-Seq was applied to map out a high-resolution landscape of immunotherapyresistant melanoma and subsequently discovered a gene expression program that correlated with reduced tumor infiltrating T cells. This study provided a potential approach to predict resistance to immunotherapy before treatment begins, thereby providing a potential target as a means to delay or counter resistance [26].
The discrepancy between mRNA and protein abundance has been frequently reported and even more discordant in the heterogenous tissue of a tumor. Although proteomic studies provide accurate information on the final layer of intratumoral heterogeneity, single-cell proteomics has proven to be more challenging than other single-cell genomic sequencing methods since there is currently no approach to amplify the initial amount of protein. Instead, efforts have been focused on developing methods to more sensitively detect small amounts of protein. Single-cell mass-cytometry (also known as CyTOF) was introduced to tackle this issue with the use of antibody conjugation in combination with MS in order to determine functional properties of cells. In a recent study, this single-cell proteomic method was applied to characterize the functional states of immune cells in melanoma patients before and after anti–PD-1 immunotherapy and found that the frequency of CD14+ CD16−HLA-DRhi monocytes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells could be used as a biomarker to discriminate responders from nonresponders [27].
Single-cell sequencing technologies already have led to many discoveries in the field of cancer immunology and proven it can provide further insight into our understanding of intratumor heterogeneity, immunoediting, and immunogenicity that are difficult to resolve from bulk sequencing. Nevertheless, many dynamic tumor processes remain poorly understood. With the continual advances in single-cell methods at an ever more affordable cost, the repertoire of new data across additional tumor types and at unprecedented sample size will aid in capturing individual cell states at the transcriptional, regulatory, and translational layers. In combination with functional work, these mechanistic insights can be used to identify prognostic biomarkers, monitor circulating tumor cells, map rare cell population, estimate and stratify tumor and tumor microenvironment heterogeneity, and, finally, be used to identify therapy resistance mechanisms. Ultimately, these approaches will guide the way to detection of single-cell signatures in cancer, precisely manipulate immunity with therapy and vaccination to overcome immune suppression, revitalize immune surveillance, and stabilize or hopefully revert the tumor phenotype in cancer patients.
Multi-omics methods
