RNA Mapping of Mutant Myotonic Dystrophy Protein Kinase 3’-Untranslated Region Transcripts.

 Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), which is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder, results from a CTG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the 3’untranslated region (3’-UTR) of the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene. Retention of mutant DMPK (mDMPK) transcripts in the nuclei of affected cells has been known to be the main cause of pathogenesis of the disease. Thus, reducing the RNA toxicity through elimination of the mutant RNA has been suggested as one therapeutic strategy against DM1. In this study, we suggested RNA replacement with a trans-splicing ribozyme as an alternate genetic therapeutic approach for amelioration of DM1. To this end, we identified the regions of mDMPK 3’-UTR RNA that were accessible to ribozymes by using an RNA mapping strategy based on a trans splicing ribozyme library. We found that particularly accessible sites were present not only upstream but also downstream of the expanded repeat sequence. Repair or replacement of the mDMPK transcript with the specific ribozyme will be useful for DM1 treatment through reduction of toxic mutant transcripts and simultaneously restore wild-type DMPK or release nucleusentrapped mDMPK transcripts to the cytoplasm. DM1 is an autosomal dominant genetic and the most common neuromuscular disease in adults, affecting approximately 5 to 20 out of 100,000 among the worldwide population including Asians (Harper, 2001). The DM mutation is a CTG trinucleotide expansion in the 3’-UTR of the DMPK gene on chromosome 19q (Brook et al., 1992). The severity of disease is proportional to the number of the expanded CTG repeats. The number of repeats is in the range of 535 in the normal population, and DM alleles harbor more than 50 and up to several thousand repeats in DM1 patients. The pathogenesis of DM1 is directly mediated by a toxic mDMPK RNA that is entrapped in the affected cell nucleus. A number of pieces of evidence suggest that pleiotropic effects of aberrant interactions between the mDMPK transcripts that are retained in the nucleus and RNA binding proteins, such as muscleblindlike 1, change the metabolism of target mRNAs, including splicing (Wheeler, 2008). Additively, decreased DMPK protein levels in DM1 patients due to loss of cytoplasmlocalized mRNA for translation could cause physiological and functional alterations in phosphorylation of target proteins, including CUGbinding protein 1, and hence has been suggested as a contributor to the pathology of the disease (Kaliman and Llagostera, 2008). There is no cure for DM yet. However, several approaches to reduce the mutant RNAmediated toxicity through elimination of nucleustrapped toxic mDMPK transcripts have been proposed as specific therapies for reversal of the disease phenotype. They include approaches with antisense, small catalytic RNA, or siRNA, which can reduce the level of mDMPK RNA by directly targeting the expanded CUG repeats of the mDMPK transcript (Furling et al., 2003; Krol et al., 2007; Langlois et al., 2003; Mahadevan et al., 2006). However, high specificity for degradation of the mutant alleles, nontoxicity, and lack of offtarget effects will be required to minimize nonspecific reduction of the normal allele and cellular toxicity. RNA repair or RNA replacement has been described as a new approach to human gene therapy against genetic disorders, which relies on the Tetrahymena group Ibased transsplicing ribozyme (Sullenger and Gilboa, 2002). This ribozyme could cleave a target 5’exon RNA and transligate an exon that is tagged at its 3’end onto the cleaved target RNA both in vitro and in bacteria and mammalian cells (Been and Cech, 1986; Sullenger and Cech, 1994; Jones et al., 2006). Therefore, the transsplicing ribozyme can reduce the level of a specific target RNA and simultaneously induce transgene activity specifically in the target RNA expressing cells. Indeed, transsplicing ribozymes have been successfully developed to replace mutant transcripts that are associated with several human genetically inherited diseases, including DM1 (Lan et al., 1998; Phylactou et al. 1998; Rogers et al., 2002). Moreover, we have shown that trans-splicing ribozyme targeting and replacing the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) RNA could specifically and efficiently regress human tumors not only in cell cultures but also in animals without any toxicity in normal tissues or any off-target splicing effects (Hong et al., 2008; Jeong et al., 2008; Kwon et al., 2005; Song and Lee, 2008; Song et al., 2009). Thus, a trans-splicing ribozyme that can repair toxic mDMPK RNA with the wild-type one or replace the nucleus-entrapped mutant transcripts with RNA that can be released into the cytoplasm would be a potential tool for DM1 treatment. To this end, we have developed mDMPK 3’-UTR-specific transsplicing ribozymes by utilizing an RNA mapping procedure that identifies the most accessible ribozyme sites. Any uridine (U) residue in a target RNA can be targeted for splicing by the trans-splicing ribozyme through alteration of the internal guide sequence (IGS), which is the 5’-exon binding site of the ribozyme, to make it complementary to the target sequence (Long et al., 2003; Sullenger, 1995). However, the ribozyme can actually access only a limited number of uridines on the target RNA due to complicated tertiary structure formation of the substrate RNA (Lan et al., 2000). To develop most potential mDMPK 3’-UTRspecific ribozymes, therefore, identification of the regions of the target transcript that are accessible to ribozymes should be performed first. To this end, we employed an RNA mapping strategy based on RNA tagging (Jones et al.,1996) and a trans splicing ribozyme library, which has been described in detail elsewhere (Fig. 1) (Lan et al., 1998; Lan et al., 2000; Kwon et al., 2005; Ryu et al., 2003; Song and Lee, 2007). We constructed the GN5 ribozyme library, which is based on the Tetrahymena group I intron and contains a randomized IGS. Ribozymes in the GN5 library can bind to the substrate RNA, cleave at any accessible U residue, and transfer a 3’exon that is tagged onto the ribozyme to the end of the cleaved 5’target product. We used a portion of the lacZ gene as a 3’exon molecular tag in the GN5 library. mDMPK 3’UTR RNA was synthesized using in vitro transcription of PCRamplified vector encoding the mDMPK 3’UTR gene with 200 CTG repeats (kindly supplied by Dr. Leonidas Phylactou at the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics). In order to map the mDMPK 3’UTR RNA, GN5 library RNA (10 nM) was incubated at 37°C for 3 hrs under splicing conditions (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2) in the presence of guanosine (200 μM) and in vitro-generated target RNA (100 nM). The trans-splicing reaction products were then reversetranscribed at 37°C for 30 min in the presence of argininamide (10 mM) with a 3’primer that was specific for the ribozyme’s 3’-exon lacZ sequence (5’-ATGTGCTGCAAG GCGATT-3’) (Jones et al. 1996). Produced cDNAs were amplified by PCR for 30 cycles using the same 3’primer and a 5’primer that was specific for the 5’end of the target RNA (5’-ACCCTAGAACTGTCTTCGACTCC3’) or downstream region of the expanded CTG sequence (5’-GGAATTCGGGGGATCACAGACCAT3’). The amplified trans-splicing products were then cloned into the pUC19 vector, and sequences of several clones were determined. ’ When we analyzed sequences of the splicing junction sites of the trans-spliced products amplified with the 5’-end of the target RNA as the 5’ primer, several uridines, only in the upstream of the expanded trinucleotide repeat sequence, appeared to be particularly accessible (Fig. 2). Long hairpin structures of the expanded trinucleotide repeat might hamper PCR amplification of transspliced products that result from the splicing reaction with U residues downstream of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. To identify accessible U residues in the target RNA that were present downstream of the trinucleotide repeat, we also amplified transsplicing products with the 5’primer that was specific for right downstream part of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. Then, several uridines downstream of the expanded CUG repeat sequence were also shown to be particularly accessible. In conclusion, the most accessible site upstream of the CUG repeat sequence was located in the uridine at position 99 of the mDMPK 3’UTR RNA. In addition, the uridine at position 854 of the target RNA was the most accessible site that was present downstream of the CUG repeat. Interestingly, most of the accessible sites, including positions 99 and 854, which were identified using this mapping method, were generally present in the loop or bulge region of the RNA’s secondary structure, as predicted by a computer program (Fig. 2). In contrast, no accessible sites were found in the long hairpinformed CUG repeat region. In previous studies, we showed that the relative transsplicing reaction efficacy at different sites in a target RNA in cells and in vitro was closely associated with the predicted accessibility determined by mapping results (Ryu et al., 2003; Ryu and Lee, 2004; Kwon et al., 2005). Therefore, the ribozymes that target the ac cessible sites identified here are anticipated to be more active than those that target other sites. A specific ribozyme that targeted position 99 or 854 of the mDMPK 3’-UTR RNA (Rib99 or Rib854, respectively) was constructed by in vitro transcription of cDNA template. We made cDNA template by PCR of the pT7L-21 plasmid with a 5’ primer that contained the T7 promoter and each ribozyme’s IGS, and a 3’ primer that was specific for the 3’-exon sequence, as described (Sullenger and Cech, 1994; Jones et al., 1996). The pT7L-21 plasmid encodes a slightly shortened version of the native group I intron from Tetrahymena. The IGS of the L-21 trans-splicing ribozyme (5'GGAGGG3') was exchanged with 5'-GGCGGT-3' in Rib99 or with 5’-GGAAAG-3’ in Rib854. The specific ribozyme (100 nM) was then incubated with the substrate RNA (10 nM) under splicing conditions. RT-PCR analyses were performed using a 3' primer that was specific for the 3' exon tag sequence and a 5' primer that was specific for the mDMPK 3’-UTR RNA. The amplified fragment could be seen at the expected size of 197 bp or 130 bp when incubating the target RNA with Rib99 or Rib854, respectively (data not shown). Sequence analyses of the amplified trans-spliced products revealed that both Rib99 (targeting the upstream region of the expanded CUG repeat) and Rib854 (targeting the downstream site of the expanded CUG repeat) accurately employed the trans-splicing reaction of their 3'-exon tag onto the target RNA at the predicted reaction site (Fig. 3). These studies indicate that specific ribozyme targeting of predicted accessible sites can replace mDMPK 3’UTR RNA with a 3'-exon that is tagged at the 3'end of the ribozyme with high fidelity through targeted transsplicing. Recently, several gene therapy protocols, based on inhibitory RNA or short oligonucleotides that target the toxic mDMPK transcript, have been described for DM1 therapy (Wheeler, 2008). For the successful application of the RNA-or oligonucleotide-mediated strategies to clinical DM1 treatment, specificity, safety, and efficacy, in addition to delivery issues, are important criteria to be considered. In this study, we developed transsplicing ribozymes that can potentially repair the mutant DMPK transcript with the wild-type one or replace the mutant RNA with a therapeutically relevant transcript. In previous studies, we have shown that hTERTspecific trans-splicing ribozymes could specifically and effectively target and replace the hTERT RNA in vivo as well as in tumor cells without toxic effects on normal tissues and without nonspecific off-target splicing to other RNAs besides the target transcript (Hong et al., 2008; Jeong et al., 2008; Song et al., 2009). The transsplicing ribozyme that targets upstream of the expanded CUG repeats (Rib99) that was developed in this study could be used as a repair tool to restore the wildtype DMPK protein. A major advantage of the RNA repair approach with a transsplicing ribozyme for DM1 therapy is that the ribozyme could restore and maintain the regulated expression of normal DMPK protein and that it could simultaneously reduce the production of toxic mutant DMPK RNA. However, targeting sites in the mDMPK 3’UTR are also present in the wildtype DMPK RNA. Therefore, one limitation of the RNA repair approach is the possibility of targeting normal alleles. Although targeting and replacing normal DMPK RNA with a trans splicing ribozyme will not lead to reduction of normal protein, the efficacy of repair of mutant transcript can decrease. Therefore, highefficiency targeting to the target RNA will be a critical factor for a successful therapeutic outcome. Another developed ribozyme that targets downstream of the expanded CUG repeats (Rib 854) could be useful to replace the toxic RNA that is entrapped in the nucleus with RNA that can be released into the cytoplasm. Recent findings showed that mDMPK 3’UTR that is aberrantly retained in the nucleus could be transported extensively to the cytoplasm when it has attached to its 3’end the woodchuck post transcriptional regulatory element (WPRE), which can naturally accumulate hepatitis transcripts in the cytoplasm, resulting in an increase in myoblast differentiation whose initiation is failed in mutant 3’UTRexpressing cells (Mastroyiannopoulos et al., 2005 and 2008). Therefore, RNA replacement of the mDMPK 3’UTR RNA with RNA with WPRE could stimulate cytoplasmic release of the mDMPK transcript, relieving the pathogenic effects that are induced by the toxic RNA. Another group also suggested that the transsplicing ribozyme approach may form a therapeutic strategy for diseases that are associated with repeat expansions, including DM1 (Phylactou et al., 1998). However, the authors constructed and characterized a ribozyme that targeted a randomized selected site. An essential factor that influences the efficacy of RNAmediated gene therapeutic approaches is the accessibility of inhibitory elements for binding to the target RNA. RNA mapping studies, which were performed in this study, therefore, should be preceded to select the most accessible sites in the target RNA, develop the most potent RNA inhibitors, and optimize intracellular antimDMPK RNA activity. Noticeably, this study showed that very stable RNAs, such as mDMPK 3’UTR, were successfully targeted and mapped with the transsplicing ribozyme. The mapping procedure that was performed in this study could be broadly useful for the identification of the most accessible sites in specific diseaseassociated transcripts to develop therapeutic strategies with RNA in hibitors. 