Classification of Peroxiredoxin Subfamilies Using Regular Expressions
Peroxiredoxins (Prx’s) are a superfamily of peroxidases that are ubiquitous in all super-kingdoms. Previous biochemical and structural studies have suggested that Prx’s could be divided into five subfamilies (1-Cys, Typical 2Cys, Atypical 2-Cys C, L-and R-types). In this work, we have developed a set of regular expression patterns describing subfamily-specific spatial constraints of the key catalytic residues. Using these patterns, 1,016 Prx’s available in public databases were classified into the five subfamilies. Our method performed well for most of the types except for Atypical 2 Cys R type.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as the superoxide anion radical (O₂'￣), hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) and the hydroxyl radical (HO’), are intermediately formed during the univalent reduction of oxygen to water, and are also produced during p-oxidation of fatty acids and upon exposure to radiation, metals, and redox drugs
(Nordberg and Arner, 2001). H₂O₂ itself is not very reactive, but can be further reduced to the extremely reactive HO’. ROS can cause molecular damage to various cellular components such as lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, leading to cell death, and were thus considered to be highly toxic byproducts of oxygen metabolism and of no useful biological significance. To minimize the damaging effects of ROS, aerobic organisms evolved both non enzymatic and enzymatic antioxidant defenses (Ahmad, 1995). Enzymatic defenses include superoxide dismutases which convert
O₂'￣ to H₂O₂, and catalases, gluthathione peroxidases and peroxiredoxins which convert H₂O₂ to H₂O. Recent findings show that, in addition to its deleterious effects, H₂O₂ is produced transiently in response to the activation of many cell surface receptors and serves as a ubiquitous intracellular messenger at sub-toxic concentrations (Rhee et al., 2005).
Peroxiredoxins (Prx’s) are a large family of antioxidant enzymes which are abundant, in several isoforms, in yeast, plant, and animal cells and in most eubacteria and archaea (Chae et al., 1994; Rhee et al., 2001; Hofmann et al., 2002). Prx’s reduce deleterious
H₂O₂ or alkyl hydroperoxides utilizing the thiol group of a cysteine residue (Wood et al., 2003b), and in some cases are involved in the decomposition of highly toxic peroxynitrite (Bryk et al., 2000). Some Prx’s also play significant roles in receptor signaling as, after completion of its mission as an intracellular messenger, the timely elimination of H₂O₂ is critical (Wood et al., 2003a; Rhee et al., 2005).
All Prx’s, belonging to the thioredoxin-fold super-family, contain a conserved ‘peroxidatic’ Cys (Cp) in the N-terminal portion and share the same peroxidatic active -site structure (Wood et al., 2003b). The Cp residue is oxidized by peroxides to a cysteine sulfenic acid (Cp-SOH) intermediate. Prx’s are classified into either the 2-Cys or 1-Cys types, based on the occurrence of the ‘resolving’ Cys (Cr) (Rhee et al., 2001; Hofmann et al., 2002). In 2-Cys Prx’s, the Cp-SOH and C R -SH react and form a disulfide (Cp-S-S-Cr). The stable disulfide form is then reduced by one of several cell specific disulfide oxidoreductases (e.g., thioredoxin (Trx), tryparedoxin, AhpD, or AhpF), completing the catalytic cycle. In 1-Cys Prx’s, the sulfenic acid is directly recycled via oxidoreductases such as Trx and glutaredoxin. The 2-Cys Prx’s have been subdivided into either ‘typical’ or ‘atypical’ types depending on the location of the C r residue. In typical 2-Cys Prx’s, the Cp-SOH reacts with the Cr residue located in the C-terminal arm from the other subunit. In contrast, the C r residue in atypical 2-Cys Prx’s resides within the same subunit. As the atypical 2-Cys Prx’s have been further subdivided into ‘L’, ‘C’, or ‘R’ type subfamilies, also depending on the spatial location of the C r residue (Choi et al., 2003), there are five unique Prx’s subfamilies in total. Sub-classification of all known Prx’s at this fine scale may provide further insights into the biochemical mechanism and protein evolution of this important protein family. Biochemical functions of a protein are typically predicted from its sequence similarity to those proteins whose functions or 3D structures have been experimentally determined. The first line of sequence search method is using the pair-wise sequence similarity algorithms such as BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997) and FASTA (Pearson, 1994). Such methods are appropriate for detecting sequences of relatively high homology, but are not efficient in detecting distant members of a divergent protein family such as Prx’s. The sensitivity of sequence search methods has been improved by profile -or motif-based analysis, which uses information derived from multiple sequence alignments to construct and search for sequence patterns. Unlike pairwise sequence similarity methods, the latter can exploit additional information, such as the position and identity of residues that are conserved throughout the family, as well as variable insertion and deletion probabilities. The hidden Markov model is one appropriate method to express a profile or motif because it provides a solid statistical foundation to model information from a multiple sequence alignment (Eddy, 1998). While profile and hidden Markov model methods perform appropriately in detecting homologous proteins, these generally afford only a very high level of functional classification. Most of the protein family databases based on profile, motif or domain, such as Pfam (Bateman et al., 2000), PROSITE (Hofmann et al., 1999), BLOCKS (Henikoff et al., 1999), PRINTS (Attwood et al., 2000) and InterPRO (Apweiler et al., 2000), have superfamily of the Prx’s. But these databases do not include the classification of Prx’s subfamily. We have classified Prx’s to distinguish between subfamilies within a structurally and functionally diverse superfamily. This work represents the classification tool and method focused on a specific protein superfamily, Prx’s.
Various protein superfamily databases are publicly available in the internet. We queried the following databases with a keyword ‘peroxiredoxin’: Pfam, PROSITE, InterPro and BLOCKS. The resulting superfamily had annotations such as TSA (thiol-specific antioxidant), AhpC (alkyl hydroperoxide reductase), Tpx (thioredoxin peroxidase) and peroxi redoxin. The protein entries belonging to these families were downloaded and the redundant entries were removed. Summary of the collected sequences used in this analysis is provided in Table 1.
We retrieved entries from PDB (Berman et al., 2000, release May 31, 2005) by querying a keyword “peroxiredoxin”, resulting 25 hits. From the manual inspection of the description field, 21 structures were identified as the true members of Prx’s family (Table 2). These entries were classified into 4 subfamilies of Prx’s, except Atypical 2 Cys C Type for which no crystal structure has been reported yet.
A regular expression (abbreviated as regexp, regex or regxp) is a string that describes or matches a set of strings, according to certain syntax rules. Regular expressions are used by many text editors and utilities to search and manipulate bodies of text based on certain patterns (Stubbletine, 2003; Fridl, 1997). The protein motifs can be represented as regular expressions. And the structural properties of motif can be formulated by regular expression. The advantages of using regular expressions are 1) fairly concise and easy to understand, 2) well known algorithms for matching, 3) fairly easy to display and 4) accepting insertion or deletion.
There are several key amino acid residues that have been recognized as playing critical roles in the peroxiredoxin activity. For example, a Pro (P) is located several residues upstream of the peroxidatic Cys (Cp), while an Arg (R) in C-terminal neutralizes the negative charge of the intermediate. Their importance is also supported by the strong conservation of sequences and structures (Choi et al., 2003). Prx’s family can be classified by the existence and location of resolving Cys (Cr) that form S-S bond with the peroxidatic Cys (Cp). Sequence patterns of Cp and Cr were learned from the 21 PDB entries. We superposed the protein structures of Prx’s family with Deep-Viewer (Guex and Peitsch, 1997) and the subsequent visual inspection located the critical P, Cp, Cp and R on sequences. See Fig. 1 for schematic diagram of key residues. The minimum and maximum number of intervening amino acids residues were calculated from these sequences and converted into regex forms. These forms were further modified by allowing potential insertions and deletions. For example, atypical 2 Cys C type of peroxiredoxin could be defined by the pattern “P.{6} Cp.{4} Cr.{60,90} R”. This regular expression is translated as: (Pro) -(6 any residues) (Cys) (4 any residues) (Cys) (between 60 and 90 of any residues) (Arg). Details of pattern used in classification are provided in Table 3. A short program for matching the regular expressions with the amino acid sequences was written in Perl Verseion 5.8.4 (the source code available upon request).
A set of Prx’s family was converted into FASTA format file (a total of 1,085 sequences). Some sequences were excluded from the set, based on following criteria: (1) The sequences whose amino acid length was too short (100 AA) or too long (300 AA) were removed, as Prx’s molecular weight typically ranges between 20 ~ 30kD. (2) The sequences where the pattern “P.{6}C” was located within 25 AA from the N-terminus was removed, as they lost some important secondary structure elements characteristic to Prx’s. The final set of Prx’s includes 1,016 entries, with which we ran the search for classification of Prx’s by using the defined regular expressions. Since the regex for Atypical 2 Cys L type is inclusive of and less restrictive than that of Typical 2 Cys, we gave higher priority to Typical 2 Cys. Classification of 1 Cys is difficult due to the lack of resolving Cys (Cr). Accordingly, we assigned those without any other matches than the basic Prx’s pattern to 1 Cys. See Fig. 2
 for the flowchart of the analysis. Summary of classification is provided in Table 4. The full list of proteins for each subfamily is available at the supplementary web site (http://xray2.snu.ac.kr/Prx/).
In order to validate our classification result, we performed multiple sequence alignments (MSA) of each resulting cluster. For this, we used the ClustalW program with default settings (Higgins et al., 1994). The key catalytic residues (P, Cp, Cp and R) and all the secondary structure elements were aligned extremely well. Compared to the alignment provided by Pfam that included all potential Prx’s in a single MSA output, our subfamily-specific MSA provided much improved and well defined alignments (see the supplementary web site for details), demonstrating the validity of our classifi-cation scheme. Some of the sequences matched more than one regex patterns. For example, Uniprot accession 096763, known as a member of Typical 2 Cys on the structural basis (PDB ID 1UUL), matched the regex pattern of either Atypical 2 Cys C type or Typical 2 Cys. For these ambiguous sequences, we confirmed their true membership by manual inspection of the subfamily-specific MSA output. For example, O96763 was well absorbed in the MSA of Typical 2 Cys sequences, while it became an outlier in the MSA of Atypical 2 Cys L type sequences. In this way, we were able to unambiguously confirm the true membership of all the previously ambiguous sequences (Table 5). The error rates of the regex-based classification were then 7/140, 1/142, 7/51, and 1/414 for Atypical 2 Cys C, L, R and Typical 2 Cys types, respectively. Our simple method performed extremely well for most of the types except for Atypical 2 Cys R type. It appears that the regex for the latter is subtle and prone to include false positives. We may need more key residues yet to be discovered based on the reaction mechanism of the enzyme. It should also be noted that the multiple sequence alignments hinted the potential of even finer sub-classification.
Peroxi redoxins form such a divergent family with over 1,000 sequences in the public sequence databases, occurring in from prokaryotes to mammals. Current protein domain or family databases list them as a single large family and thus are not much informative in understanding detailed molecular mechanism of this biologically important class of proteins. It should also be noted that these databases except for PROSITE contain contaminations, that is, classifying some non-Prx’s as Prx’s. For example, Q8RB02, belonging to thioredoxins, do not share the key catalytic residues but it shares a noticeable global sequence similarity with some Prx’s. This is not at all surprising considering that Prx’s belong to the Trx structural fold, demonstrating the risk associated with profile-based methods, albeit significant advantages. We employed PROSITE-like sequence patterns, which may be too simple to sub-classify such a large and diverse family. We successfully augmented its weakness by meticulous choice of patterns based on the Prx’s reaction mechanism as well as their structural characteristics and by hierarchical classification of subfamilies. However, our method showed some small but non-negligible mis classifications. Future improvement may require even more key catalytic residues to be included in the regex patterns. Alternatively, judicious use of multiple sequence alignments combined with profile-based models may be applied to our pattern-based subfamilies. Besides improving the accuracy of sub-classification, identifying even finer sub-classes should be also important as it may shed light on understanding the detailed biochemical mechanism. Accurate classification of a protein family is also critical in constructing molecular phylogeny and thus understanding evolution of Prx’s.
