The Hairless Gene: A Putative Navigator of Hair Follicle Development.

The Hairless (HR) gene regulates the expression of several target genes as a transcriptional corepressor of nuclear receptors. The hair follicle (HF), a small independent organ of the skin, resides in the epidermis and undergoes regenerative cycling for normal hair formation. HF development requires many genes and signaling pathways to function properly in time and space, one of them being the HR gene. Various mutations of the HR gene have been reported to cause the hair loss phenotype in rodents and humans. In recent studies, it has been suggested that the HR gene is a critical player in the regulation of the hair cycle and, thus, HF development. Furthermore, the HR gene is associated with the Wnt signaling pathway, which regulates proliferation and differentiation of cells and plays an essential role in hair and skin development. In this review, we summarize the mutations responsible for human hair disorders and discuss the roles of the HR gene in HF development. Keywords: hairless, corepressor, hair follicle, hair cycle, hair lossThe hair follicle (HF) is a small independent organ of the skin that undergoes regenerative cycling for normal hair formation. HF formation during embryogenesis and regenerative cycling periods occurs through close crosstalk between epithelial and mesenchymal cells (Millar, 2002). HF cycling is composed of the growth phase (anagen), regressing phase (catagen), and resting phase (telogen) (Paus et al., 2004). The HF, a complex skin appendage, is composed of many different compartments, including the sebaceous gland, which produces oil; the bulge, which is the niche for stem cells; the bulb, which has actively proliferating and differentiating cells; and the stalk, which is divided into three layers the hair shaft, inner root sheath (IRS), and outer root sheath (ORS) (Fig. 1; Blanpain et al., 2006). Each layer expresses layerspecific keratin proteins that contribute to HF keratinization, leading to formation of a rigid structure (Langbein et al., 2005; Shimomura et al., 2010). The hairless (Hr) gene was first cloned in the ‘hairless’ (Hrhr) mouse, whose genome contained an endogenous murine leukemia provirus in intron 6 of this gene (Stoye et al., 1988). Homozygous Hrhr mice initially grow hair until the beginning of the hair cycle, when they start to lose hair from the head and continue to lose it until reaching the caudal area (Brooke, 1926). Then, this hairless phenotype is permanent hence the name ‘hairless’. A study of Hrhr mutant mice has revealed that the Hr gene is important for hair growth and the hair cycle (Panteleyev et al., 1998). The rat hr gene was isolated as a gene that is regulated by thyroid hormone (Thompson, 1996), and the human HR gene was identified as a gene that is responsible for congenital hair disorders (Ahmad et al., 1998a; Ahmad et al., 1998b; Cichon et al., 1998). The mouse, rat, and human Hr genes encode an approximately 130kDa protein (HR) that localizes to the nucleus and contains a single zincfinger domain (CachonGonzalez et al., 1994; Djabali et al., 2001). The mouse Hr gene is expressed mainly in the brain and skin, with minor expression elsewhere (CachonGonzalez et al., 1994; Cachon-Gonzalez et al., 1999). In this review, we will summarize the molecular characteristics of the Hr gene, the roles of the Hr gene in HF development, and the mutations that are responsible for human hair disorders. The HR acts as a transcriptional corepressor through interaction with nuclear receptors. Nuclear receptors regulate the expression of specific genes as transcription factors in developmental processes and other various physiological processes. Typically, nuclear receptors activate the transcription of target genes through binding to their ligands, such as steroid hormone, thyroid hormone, and other small molecules, including retinoic acids and vitamin D. In some cases, nuclear receptors repress transcription in the absence of their ligands (Jepsen et al., 2002; Mangelsdorf et al., 1995; Privalsky, 2004; Smith et al., 2004), and this repression occurs through association with its corepressors, such as nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR), silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptors (SMRT), and HR (Chen et al., 1995; Horlein et al., 1995; Sande., 1996; Thompson et al., 2006; Zhongjian et al., 2006). HR has been shown to interact with thyroid hormone receptor (TR), retinoic acid orphan receptor α (RORα), and vitamin D receptor (VDR) (Thompson, 1996; Hsieh et al., 2003; Moraitis et al., 2002). α TR is a receptor for thyroid hormone, which is an essential component of development of the central nervous system (CNS), and functions as a transcription factor that regulates the expression of target genes in response to thyroid hormone binding. The interaction between HR and TR was found in a yeast twohybrid screen for HR-interacting proteins, and its interaction was reduced in the presence of thyroid hormone (Thompson et al., 1997). In vitro biochemical assays and in vivo coimmunoprecipitation experiments have demonstrated that hr has two independent TRinteracting domains (TR-ID)-TR-ID1 and TR-ID2 span amino acids 816-830 and 1026-1038 of the rat hr gene, respectively (Fig. 2). These TR-ID domains of HR contain a consensus sequence, a stretch of hydrophobic residues: I/LIXXL/VV. This essential motif is similar to those of other corepressors, such as N-CoR and SMRT (Potter et al., 2001; Potter et al., 2002; Thompson et al., 1997). Deletion mapping of HR revealed three repression domains (RD) that span amino acids 236450 (RD1), 568 864 (RD2), and 864981 (RD3) (Fig. 2). The repression activity usually occurs through interaction with histone deacetylases (HDACs) (Burke et al., 2000; Glass et al., 2000; Pazin et al., 1997). The HR protein interacts with several HDACs, including HDACs 1, 3, and 5, and the repression activity of HR is reduced on treatment with HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, HR localizes in the nuclear matrixassociated deacetylase body, which comprises corepressors and HDAC complexes (Potter et al., 2001; Potter et al., 2002, Downes et al., 2000). This evidence suggests that HR may contribute to brain or CNS development through TR, acting as a transcriptional corepressor. The HR protein interacts with another nuclear receptor, RORα, which plays an important role in cerebellar development, lipid metabolism, and neoplasia (Gigue're., 1999; Moraitis et al., 2003). HR binds to RORα using two interaction motifs, containing an LXXLL consensus sequence, and represses transcriptional activation by RORα (Moraitis et al., 2002). Cotransfection analysis revealed that HR represses transcriptional activation by all ROR isoformsα, β, and γ. Interestingly, the repression activity of RORα by HR is dependent on two LXXLL motifs, as mutations in these motifs abolished repression activity by HR, while these mutations did not affect the repression activity of TR by HR (Moraitis et al., 2002). Although HR interacts with TR and RORα, this is not enough to explain the skin phenotype in HR mutants, because there is no evidence that defects in these receptors cause a phenotype that is as striking as the complete hair loss that is observed in HR mutants (Alonso et al. 2003). On the other hand, mutants with a deletion in the VDR manifest a hair loss phenotype, which resembles that of HR mutant in mice and humans (Li et al., 1997; Yoshizawa et al., 1997). The VDR not only mediates signals of 1, 25dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3) but also acts as a transcription factor, even in the absence of vitamin D. Targeted gene deletion studies revealed that VDR is associated with multiple biological processes, especially the progression of the normal hair cycle in mammalian skin (Yoshizawa et al., 1997; Li et al., 1997; Malloy et al., 1999; Hirst et al., 1985; Hughes et al., 1988; Rut et al., 1994). VDR regulates gene expression by forming a heterodimer with RXR and binding to a vitamin Dresponsive element in target genes. As a partner of the heterodimer of VDR, RXRα is relevant for hair cycling, since conditional inactivation of RXRα in mice caused alopecia, as in VDR-null mice (Li et al., 2000). GST pulldown assays revealed that HR interacts with VDR protein in vitro, and this interaction is unaffected by the 1,25(OH)2D3 ligand. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments also showed an interaction between HR and VDR in mammalian cells (Hsieh et al., 2003). The interaction domain of HR for VDR overlaps with the interaction domains for TR and RORα (Fig. 2), and the minimal amino acid region was mapped to 750-864 (RD2) of HR (Hsieh et al., 2003). The transcriptional repression of VDR by HR occurs both in the presence and absence of its ligand, vitamin D, which is different from that of TR, in that HR mediates repression only by unliganded TR (Potter et al., 2001; Hsieh et al., 2003). In humans, HR interacts with VDR and represses the reporter activity of its target genes, such as involucrin, transglutaminase, PLCγ1, and 24-hydroxylase, in human keratinocytes (Zhongjjan et al., 2006). In situ hybridization assay revealed that HR and VDR mRNA colocalize in a subset of cells in murine HFs, including the matrix and ORS (Hsieh et al., 2003). Immunostaining showed that both nuclear proteins are colocalized in a subset of HF cells in human skin (Zhongjjan et al., 2006). These results support the biochemically defined evidence of an interaction between HR and VDR in vivo in mouse and human skin. Mouse models of various Hr mutations, such as Hrhr, Hrrh, and Hrm1Enu, have been actively studied to understand the pathophysiology of human hair loss disorders (Cachon et al., 1994; Ahmad et al., 1998c; Panteleyev et al., 1998; Nam et al., 2006). Homozygous mutant mice with autosomal recessive mutations in Hr display a distinct phenotype with strikingly similar patterns of hair loss. These mutant mice grow hair normally in the postnatal stages; however, they shed hair progressively from the eyelids to the hind limbs and subsequently develop alopecia by the third week of postnatal life. Additionally, targeted disruption of Hr also causes a hair loss phenotype, which is restored by the expression of HR in keratinocytes (Beaudoin et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2006). In Hrhr mice, apoptotic cell death in HFs is observed in the transition stages from the catagen to anagen, suggesting that HR may play a role in regulating the HF growth cycle (Panteleyev et al., 1999). Mutant mice with a loss of function in Hr display the hair loss phenotype, which suggests that null or a lack of functional HR causes the hair loss phenotype. Recently, it was shown that dysregulation of HR expression also causes the hair loss phenotype. The ‘hairpoor’ (HrHp) and Naked (HrN) mice display a different hair loss phenotype from those reported in mice with a loss offunction mutation in HR (Baek et al., 2009). The HrHp/+ mouse has short and sparse hair at early ages but gradually lose hair and become almost bald at age 40 weeks, while homozygote (HrHp/HrHp) mice are born Hairless and stay naked (Baek et al., 2009). We found that this HrHp mouse harbors a mutation in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the Hr gene, and it causes overexpression of HR protein (Baek et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2010). This evidence has revealed that both loss and gainoffunction mutations in Hr cause the hair loss phenotype, which suggests that expressional regulation of Hr is critical for maintenance of the hair cycle or development of HF. Keratins are critical components of the HF. The hair shaft is highly keratinized tissue, and its major components are hair keratins (Langbein et al., 2005). The keratins are divided into two typestype I and type IIand their heterodimerization forms intermediate filaments that provide resilience to hair. Keratin is produced by keratinocytes, which multiply and differentiate. While some keratinocytes become epithelial cells of the ORS and IRS, some become elongated to form the hair shaft (Coulombe et al., 2002; Moll et al., 2008). Epithelial keratins are widely expressed in the ORS and IRS of the HF (Langbein et al., 2003; Langbein et al., 2001). Keratin expression is regulated by several signaling pathways and transcription factors, such as Lef1 (a key transcription factor in Wnt signaling), Msx2, Foxn1, and Hoxc13 (DasGupta et al., 1999; Merrill et al., 2001; Ma et al., 2003; Schlake et al., 2000; Tkatchenko et al., 2001). Recently, we found that HR regulates the ex pression of keratins that reside in the IRS. The IRS forms its structure by obligate heterodimerization of specified keratins. Type I IRS keratin genes (ie, Krt25, Krt27, and Krt28) and the type II IRS keratin gene Krt71 have been identified as specifically expressed in the IRS and are known to support the structures of the IRS cuticle, Huxley's layer, and Henle’s layer (Runkel et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2007). We observed that the expression of Krt25, Krt27, Krt28, Krt71, and Tchh is consistently affected by HR, both in vivo and in vitro (in submission). These results suggest that HR affects the formation of the HF through regulation of keratin expression in the IRS. Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays a crucial role not only in HF morphogenesis but also in the regeneration of the HF through regulation of anagen initiation in the adult hair cycle (Ahmad et al., 1998c; Huelsken et al., 2001; Beaudoin et al., 2005; Stenn et al., 2001). The βcatenin protein, a key molecule of the Wnt signaling pathway, is activated and translocated into the nucleus when a Wnt protein binds to its receptor, Frizzled. In the nucleus, β-catenin forms a complex with Lef1/Tcf transcription factors and regulates target gene expression (Huelsken et al., 2001). Inactivation of Wnt signaling occurs through its inhibitors, and keratinocyte cells, including the Dickkopf (Dkk) family, Sclerostin domain-containing protein 1 (Sostdc1), Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (Wif1), and the Secreted frizzledrelated protein (Sfrp) family (Kawano et al., 2003). The fact that induction of HR protein using transgenic systems rescues the Hairless phenotype of HRnull mice reveals that HR functions in progenitor keratinocytes and induces the hair cycle, thus allowing HF regeneration (Beaudoin et al., 2005). This suggests that HR may regulate the Wnt signaling pathway, since this signaling directly regulates HF regeneration (Zarach et al., 2004; Beaudoin et al., 2005; Lo Celso et al., 2004). Gene expression profiling of Hr knockout and Hrrescued transgenic mice have revealed that the Wnt-responsive gene Axin2 is regulated by HR, which suggests that HR can promote the Wnt signaling pathway. In addition, the HR overexpression mouse HrHp shows increased expression of Myc and Ccnd1, target genes of Wnt signaling (Kim et al., 2010). As expected, the Wnt inhibitors Wise and Soggy are upregulated in Hr knockout mice and downregulated in HRrescued transgenic skin, showing an inverse relationship with HR expression in vivo (Beaudoin et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2006). Furthermore, Sfrp2 mRNA expression is downregulated in HrHp mouse skin (Kim et al., 2010). A promoter analysis has suggested that the regulation of Wnt inhibitor expression is regulated by HR specifically, because there is no such regulation that is detected by another corepressor, SMRT (Beaudoin et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2006). These findings suggest that HR can modulate more than one regulator in the Wnt signaling pathway, and it appears to be crucial that the timing and level of HR protein expression are tightly regulated for normal HF development. Regulation of Wnt signaling by HR is one component of the complex interactions of signaling pathways in HF cycling. HR may regulate the expression of genes that modulate other signaling pathways, such as Shh, BMP, and TGFβ, which regulate HF morphogenesis and cycling. Atrichia with popular lesions (APL; MIM 209500) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Patients are born with natal hair, which falls out in the first few months of life and never replenishes. In addition to the complete absence of any hair, including scalp hair, eyebrows, eyelashes, and pubic hair, they also develop papular eruptions on the scalp, cheeks, elbows, arms, knees, and thighs. Histological examination of a patient’s skin has revealed the absence of HFs (Ahmad et al., 1998a; Henn et al., 2002; Sprecher et al., 1999). A similar hair disorder as APL, alopecia universalis congenita (ALUNC; MIM 203655) also manifests as a lack of body hair without papular lesions and has been found to be caused by mutations in the HR gene. A skin biopsy of one patient revealed that there were few HFs present, without hair in them (Ahmad et al., 1998b). Multiple kinds of mutations of the human HR gene with a loss of function have been reported (Table 1). As a model for APL, we and others have reported hairless mutant mice that have a similar phenotype as APL. Histological analyses have revealed that they show an absence of HFs and the formation of abnormal structures, such as utricles and dermal cysts, in the skin (Ahmad et al., 1998c; Panteleyev et al., 1998; Nam et al., 2006; Zarach et al., 2004; Sundberg, 1994). APL is also caused by recessive mutations in the VDR gene, as found in a vitamin Ddependent rickets type 2A (VDDR2A; OMIM 277440) patient (Miller et al., 2001). This suggests that there is a functional relationship between HR and VDR in controlling postnatal cycling of the HF, as mentioned above. Autosomal dominant Marie Unna hereditary hypotrichosis (MUHH; MIM 146550) is characterized by abnormal hair density in the scalp, eyebrows, eyelashes, and body. Affected individuals are born with sparse hair that is characteristically coarse, wiry, and twisted in early childhood and progress to complete baldness (Argenziano et al., 1999; Unna., 1925; Ludwig., 1953). Although genetic heterogeneity has been reported in Dutch, Belgian, British, French, German, and Chinese families, the majority of MUHH pedigrees has been linked to chromosome 8p21, near the HR gene (Sreekumar et al., 2000; van Steensel et al., 1999; Lefevre et al., 2000; Cichon et al., 2000; Yan et al., 2004; He et al., 2004). In addition to the characteristic sparse hair phenotype at birth, MUHH is different from other HR defectassociated disorders, in that it is inherited in a dominant manner, whereas the other disorders are inherited in a recessive mode. Recently, 13 distinct mutations were identified in patients with MUHH. Interestingly, all of these mutations were present in the 5' UTR of HR (Wen et al., 2009), in contrast to mutations present in the coding sequences of HR that result in a loss of function. We and others have shown that all of these mutations upregulate HR expression at the translational level using a reporter system (Wen et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2010). In fact, in an animal model, the HrHp mouse, which has a mutation located at the same position of the HR gene as in MUHH, the expression of HR was found to be greatly increased compared with that of wildtype mice (Kim et al., 2010). The study of HR has suggested that HR functions in HF development and cycling. As a transcription factor, HR regulates the expression of many genes that are components of the HF or key molecules of the signaling pathway for hair cycling and HF maintenance. There may be many more genes that remain to be discovered as targets of HR in the skin. Identification of them will greatly facilitate the elucidation of the biological functions of HR in developmental processes and the molecular mechanisms of HF cycling. The HF is a very dynamic organ, with continuous regeneration throughout an organism’s life, and the presence and behaviors of its stem cells are only recently slowly being uncovered. Since HR associates with Wnt signaling, which is an essential pathway for stem cell function, and is expressed in ORS cells, which are the same lineage as bulge cells, the elucidation of HR function in HF stem cells will be required. Further study of HR function in HF cycling as well as in stem cell biology will provide a better understanding of HF development and may help us understand the development of other HRexpressing tissues, such as brain. This work was supported by the Basic Science 