WebChemDB: An Integrated Chemical Database Retrieval System.

 WebChemDB is an integrated chemical database retrieval system that provides access to over 8 million publicly available chemical structures, including related information on their biological activities and direct links to other public chemical resources, such as PubChem, ChEBI, and DrugBank. The data are publicly available over the web, using two-dimensional (2D) and threedimensional (3D) structure retrieval systems with various filters and molecular descriptors. The web services API also provides researchers with functionalities to programmatically manipulate, search, and analyze the data. Small molecules can be used as building blocks for combinatorial chemical synthesis; as molecular probes for analyzing biological systems in systems biology; and for the screening, design, and discovery of useful drug compounds (Chen et al., 2005; Ahn, 2007; Kang et al., 2009). Tying together many disparate sources of chemical and life sciences data into an integrated database is one of the main issues in the bioinformatics community. Large public chemical databases, such as PubChem (Wang et al., 2009) and DrugBank (Wishart et al., 2008), provide chemical structures and associated biological information, focusing on small organic molecules that have potential use in drug development with biomedical research. PubChem is an increasingly popular, freeaccess, online molecular database that is operated by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). But, many of the kinds of information that biologists find most interesting (links to primary literature; characterization data in the form of spectra, solubilities, melting/boiling points, etc.) do not appear in PubChem. Although the existing databases, in their current form, consist mainly of a catalog of biologically relevant molecules, increasing the level of crosslinking to other biological databases could result in a much more useful service. As chemical databases that contain intersecting information continue to proliferate, such crosslinking is likely to increase in importance (http://zusammen. metamolecular.com/). This paper, therefore, presents an integrated chemical database retrieval system for searching, visualizing, and analyzing chemical structures with associated biological information, including precalculated values for molecular properties (e. g., 3D coordinates, molecular weight, polar surface area, hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, rotatable bonds, XLogP, etc.). The system also offers a focused subset of calculated properties (e. g., druglike, leadlike, etc.) for molecules that are filtered by physical properties. As such, it may be useful to those who perform docking experiments or build focused chemical databases. The data were collected from and crossreferenced to public chemical data resources, such as PubChem (Wang et al., 2009), the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2000), the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI) (Degtyarenko et al., 2008), NMRShiftDB (Steinbeck et al., 2004), Distributed StructureSearchable Toxicity (DSSTox) (Richard et al., 2002), and DrugBank (Wishart et al., 2008). The public chemical data are available in various data formats (e. g., MOL, SDF, SMILES, etc.). Therefore, our parsing tool was used to parse the public chemical data to extract data according to field name mapping table, which were then dynamically uploaded to the database. The database schema consisted of chemical identification information and associated data, ranging from molecular descriptors to pathway data, spectroscopic data, and toxicological data. The molecular descriptors (3D coordinates, hydrogenbond donors, hydrogenbond acceptors, octanol/water partition coefficient log P, etc.) that were not available in the imported data were calcu lated by using the calculation modules that were available from CDK (Steinbeck et al., 2003). The detailed information on the database schema and records are available at http://biocommunity. kr/chemsearch/schema. pdf. The database was implemented using the leading opensource relational database MySQL (http://www.mysql.com). The database can search over 8 million compounds through the structure retrieval systems, which provide capabilities for: (1) twodimensional (2D) structure searches; (2) threedimensional (3D) structure searches (Raymond et al., 2003); (3) text searches; and (4) filter searches. The three search types that are available on the 2D structure search page are as follows: (1) Substructure Search (the default): the search for all compounds that have that “substructure”and other atoms. (2) Similarity Search: the search for all compounds that contain structural features that are similar, based on the Tanimoto coefficient (Butina, 1999). (3) Exact Structure: the search for all compounds that are exact structure matches in the database. The text search retrieves all compounds by using text-matching capabilities. The filter search finds useful drug compounds by using known filters, such as drug-like, newton-hit-like, fragmentlike, greasy-leads, lead-like, and big-n-greasy, as shown in Table 1. The proposed system uses MarvinSketch (http:// www.chemaxon.com/product/msketch. html) for drawing molecules and queries, MarvinView (http://www.chemaxon.com/product/mview. html) for viewing single and multiple chemical structures, and CDK for calculating physicochemical properties (e. g., molecular weight, hydrogen-bond acceptor/donors, etc.) and filtering database search results. The two-dimensional (2D) structure search engine and structure database tables are made by using the JChem library (http://www.chemaxon.com/ jchem/intro/index. html) from ChemAxon, Inc. The search engine will then retrieve all of the molecules in the database that contain the specified chemical structure. Data from associated property files can be displayed along with the structures or searched as an additional parameter. Web interfaces are delivered using the open source Tomcat Web server (http://tomcat. apache. org). The web interface provides the user with a wide array of filters and threshold values to be tailored to different searches (Fig. 1). A user can either draw the compound to be searched for using MarvinSketch or enter its SMILES string, and choose the type of structure search (similarity, substructure, or exact) to do and the similarity threshold to use. The structures of matching compounds are returned (Fig. 2). Clicking on a returned structure leads to detailed information on the corresponding compound (Fig. 3). Many of the application tools, scripts, and Web interfaces are written in Java (http://java. sun.com), SQL, and JSP (JavaServer Pages). In recent years, Internet technology for application to-application communication, commonly referred to as web services, has expanded rapidly due to growing needs (Shuichi et al., 2003). Web services enable users to develop software that accesses and manipulates massive amounts of data that are constantly refreshed. We have developed a web service API using SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) and WSDL (Web Service Definition Language) to programmatically manipulate, search, and analyze chemical structure data in WebChemDB (Table 2). The WSDL file, web service client library, and sample source codes are available at http://biocommunity. kr/chemsearch/api. jsp. WebChemDB is an integrated chemical database that contains over 8 million small molecules, collected and crosslinked from public chemical resources. The data are publicly available on the worldwide web for download and for targeted searches using a variety of powerful search engines. The chemical data include predicted or experimentally determined physicochemical properties, such as 3D structures and predicted xLogP. Web services API can help users to programmatically manipulate, search, and analyze chemical structure data in WebChemDB. In the future, we will make a workflow extension package for workflow systems, such as Taverna (Hull et al., 2006) and KNIME (Michael et al., 2008), that enables users to visually create data flows, selectively execute some or all analysis steps, and investigate the results later through interactive views on data and models. 