DNA damage occurs naturally and due to the environment, altering the cell’s abilities that are encoded by the DNA, and may lead to diseases, like cancer. Cells respond to DNA damage by DNA repair and cellular apoptosis [1, 2]. Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (APE) is an enzyme that identifies damaged apurinic/apyrimidinic sites in DNA, cuts the phosphodiester bond in the backbone of the sites, and has critical roles in the base excision pathway [3]. APE1 has recently been noted as a potential drug target for treating cancer, in that overexpression of the enzyme has been observed and shown to be associated with a poor response to cancer treatment, such as radiation and anticancer drugs, and a lower overall survival rate [4–7]. Antineoplastic agents that are to treat cancers are known to induce the expression of APE1, increasing the resistance of tumor cells to drug treatment. Thus, compounds that inhibit the activity of APE1 could be potential anticancer drugs with DNA-damaging antineoplastic agents used in the clinic [8].
For this reason, there have been several attempts to develop compounds targeting APE1. Currently, although there is no approved drug yet, three candidates—7-nitroindole-2-carboxylic acid (also known as CRT0044876) [9, 10], lucanthone (also known as Miracil D) [9], and methoxyamine (trademark TRC102)—are known to inhibit APE1 activity and are under examination in clinical trials. Lucanthone and CRT0044876 have rings similar to the deoxyribose sugar ring without a base and many hydrogen bond acceptors that can interact with hydrogen bond donors in the active site of APE1. These properties lead APE1 to stick in the site and prevent it from repairing DNA damage [11]. Methoxyamine is known to attack the open-ring form of AP sites to form an oxime linkage. In other words, methoxyamine blocks APE1 from accessing the lesion site rather than targeting the enzyme directly. This may lead to nonspecific off-target effects [12, 13]. Although several inhibitors of APE1 have been discovered, most potent compounds have weaknesses [14]. Thus, it is necessary to find novel kinds of potential inhibitors targeting APE1. Here, we present out work, in which we applied pharmacophore modeling and virtual screening. The overall procedures we carried out are illustrated in Fig. 1. We constructed pharmacophore models by capturing the common features of known inhibitors of APE1. The modes were used to screen a vast number of lead-like compounds, and molecular docking was used to prioritize the hits of the screen.