Although not many investigations for genome wide expression analysis were performed, several studies examined altered expression of genes in ATC cell lines or patient samples using microarray (Table 2) [45-50]. The upand downregulated genes in ATC identified as players in the regulation of important cellular functions which may influencing to the tumorigenesis. Onda et al. [45] found 31 over- and 56 under-expressed genes using 11 ATC cell lines compared with normal thyroid gland; then they validated these data with 10 ATC patient samples, among them, DSTN, HSPA8, Stathmin, LDH-A, ATP5A1, PSM B6, B23, HDP-1, and LDH-B were significantly upregulated in primary ATC patient samples. On the other hand, TG, PBP, and FES were downregulated in primary ATC tissues compared with normal thyroid glands. In other study of ATC cell lines, Akaishi et al. [50] identified transmembrane protein 34 (TMEM34) as specifically downregulated gene.
Although it is not a microarray analysis, Passon et al. [46] measured mRNA levels for CREM, PAX8, and NIS in 6 normal thyroid tissues, 22 PTCs, 12 FTCs, and 4 ATCs using quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis. Compared to normal tissues, NIS and PAX8 mRNA levels were significantly reduced in all types of thyroid cancer, especially in ATCs. Conversely, CREM mRNA levels were increased in all types of thyroid cancer including ATC.
To find molecular profile related to poor prognosis of thyroid cancer, Montero-Conde et al. [47] examined 7 ATC, 6 PDTC, 24 PTC and 7 FTC tissues by microarray. They comprised 13 dedifferentiated thyroid cancer (ATC and PDTC) vs. 31 WDTC (PTC and FTC) tissues. In this data, they found that 1,031 genes showed more than 2-fold changes of its expression in absolute values. Interestingly, pathways which are known to associated with tumorigenesis were preferentially altered in ATC and PDTC tissues; the MAP kinase signaling pathway, the transforming growth factor-β signaling pathway, focal adhesion and cell motility, activation of actin polymerization, and cell cycle. UBE2C, S100A4, and STK5 were significantly overexpressed in ATC and PDTC than WDTC. CDH1, TG, and PAX8 were significantly underexpressed in ATC and PDTC than WDTC, of those the down regulation of TG and PAX8 were also reported by Onda et al. [45] and Passon et al. [46].
In other study, Pallante et al. [48], reported downregulation of CBX7 expression using microarray analysis in various thyroid carcinoma-derived cell lines. Then, they validated this finding in various thyroid tissue samples. They show that CBX7 expression decreased with malignancy grade cancer tissues than in normal tissues. Interestingly, in same study, CBX7 loss of heterozygosity occurred in 36.8% (7 of 19 cases) of PTCs and in 68.7% (11 of 16 cases) of ATCs. mRNA for CDKN2A/p16 which is the molecular target of CBX7 and known to be a tumor suppressor, was also highly expressed.
As direct study of patient samples, Salvatore et al. [49] did a microarray analysis using 5 ATC compared with 10 PTC and 4 normal thyroid tissue and validated their data with further 22 ATC, 39 PTC and 19 normal thyroid samples. 914 genes distinguished ATC from normal tissue: and only 114 genes were found to discriminated normal thyroid from both PTC and ATC. Especially, 54 genes were upregulated in ATC and they are largely involved in cell cycle progression or chromosome instability. Among them, TOP2A, CDC20, CENPA, NEK2, PRC1, CCNB1, CDCA8, TTK, CENPF, and PLK1 expression was ATC-specifically up-regulated.
Taken together, the previous studies of genomic expression analysis suggested some of interesting genes and molecular changes using microarray, they could not find clearly the major driver genes or pathways for ATC tumorigenesis. This may be due to the hardness of sample collection or ATC itself could have a very complex heterogeneity. But the technical limitation of microarray itself may contribute also largely. The recently applicable next generation sequencing technology could help to solve this issue so that the molecular contribution of gene expression changes for ATC could be resolved.