Transposable elements accounts for ~45% of the human genome. They are divided into DNA transposon and retrotransposons, according to their amplification mechanisms. DNA transposons mobilize through a "cut and paste" mechanism while retrotransposons propagate through "copy and paste" mechanism. Retrotransposon transcribes its RNA intermediate, and the RNA intermediate integrates into a new genomic region using a mechanism called target primed reverse transcription (TPRT). Endogenous retroviruses, long interspersed elements (LINEs), and short interspersed elements (SINEs) belong to retrotransposon. Alu element, one of the SINEs, is the most successful retrotransposon in primate genomes. The estimated copy number of the elements is 1.1 million and it is currently retrotranspositionally active in the human genome [1]. The full-length Alu element is 300 bp long and has a dimeric structure. Both of the left and right monomers were derived from 7SL RNA gene and thus they share a high level of sequence identity. Alu elements have an internal RNA polymerase III promoter (A and B boxes) in the 5' region and a poly (A) tail in the 3' end. The transcription of Alu element is initiated by internal RNA polymerase III promoter and terminated at a nearby genomic location having TTTT terminator because the element lacks a transcription terminator (Fig. 1). Alu elements use L1 enzyme machinery for their mobilization. L1 provides Alu elements with endonuclease and reverse transcriptase. L1 endonuclease recognizes consensus oligomer (5'-TTTT/AA-3') and cleaves the genomic region. A-rich region of Alu elements binds to the released consensus site and the elements are reverse-transcribed by L1 reverse transcriptase. The second strand of the Alu element is synthesized by host DNA polymerase using the first strand of the Alu element as a DNA template. The newly inserted Alu element has 7 to 20 bp direct repeats on both sides of the element, termed target site duplications (TSDs) [23].
Alu elements are divided into several subfamilies which are determined based on diagnostic nucleotides. During the past 60 million years of the primate genome evolution, old Alu subfamilies became retrotranspositionally dormant while new Alu subfamilies emerged and expanded, leading to the increased number of different Alu subfamilies. The generally accepted canonical mechanism for Alu amplification is master gene model [4] but it could not explain the recent expansion of AluYb subfamily in the human genome: AluYb subfamily was retrotranspositionally dormant for the past 20 million years but it retrieved the ability to retrotranspose and rapidly expanded in the human genome within the past a few million years, which led to a new model of Alu amplification, stealth model, to explain the aberrant amplification of AluYb subfamily [5].
Some of Alu elements amplified and spread in genic regions contributing to human genetic diversity [246]. Alu element is able to disrupt gene function either by inserting into exonic regions or causing alternative splicing of the genes. In addition, they could cause genomic deletions through insertion-mediated deletion or recombination-associated deletion. The homologous recombination (HR) between Alu elements has associated with genomic duplications, genomic conversion as well as genomic deletions in the human genome. The genomic changes could affect gene expression and lead to abnormal proteins resulting in genetic diseases [7891011].