Spurred by unprecedented advances in sequencing technologies as well as other assays, and a recognition of the potential of NGS in determining the epigenomic landscape, several research consortia have formed to generate genome-wide maps of human epigenomic marks by sharing resources and publishing standard operating procedures, thereby ensuring best practices and high-quality datasets [60]. One of the first concerted efforts in this direction was the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) Project, started in 2003 and funded by the National Human Genome Research Institute at the National Institute of Health (NIH-NHGRI), which involved hundreds of researchers in dozens of labs across the globe. The ENCODE consortium has performed 1,650 epigenomic profiling on 147 cell lines assessing the transcriptome, transcription factor binding for dozens of transcription factors, chromatin topology, histone modifications, DNA methylation, and more (http://www.encodeproject.org) [13]. Five years after launching ENCODE, the NIH funded a second large-scale mapping project called the Roadmap Epigenomics Program. While ENCODE focused on generating data in cell lines, the Roadmap program focuses on mapping epigenomes of high-priority normal human primary tissue and human embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived cell types. As of May 2012, the Roadmap includes 61 "complete" epigenomes (of a variety of cell types) (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org) [61]. The data repository can be accessed interactively at Human Epigenome Atlas (http://www.genboree.org/epigenomeatlas/multiGridViewerPublic.rhtml), via the Washington University Epigenome Browser (http://www.epigenomegateway.wustl.edu/browser), as well as the UCSC Genome Browser (http://www.genome.ucsc.edu). Further, the NIH Roadmap is one of the members of an even larger consortium called the International Human Epigenome Consortium (IHEC; http://www.ihec-epigenomes.org), formed by institutions in 7 countries. To name a few, BLUEPRINT: a European initiative to generate about 100 reference epigenomic maps; the CREST/IHEC team in Japan: to produce reference epigenomes specializing in gastrointestinal epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells, and cells of reproductive organs; and the Epigenomic Platform Program: a Canadian program to map epigenomic variations in disease cells. Together, these efforts are expected to generate over 1,000 reference human epigenomes. Other epigenome mapping efforts focused on specific disease areas have also been undertaken. These include the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), funded by the NIH in 2006 [62], which is a part of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC; http://www.icgc.org) that was officially put together in 2008.