Heritability and the GLS approach in BLUP
Narrow-sense heritability (h2) reflects the additive effects of QTL. The estimated heritability from our data was smaller than the generally accepted heritability. This is because causal variants were not in complete LD with the SNPs that were genotyped. Incomplete LD might occur if causal variants have a lower MAF than genotyped. The effects of the SNPs are treated statistically as random, and the SNPs have a small effect on the trait [2]. However, we achieved better heritability than the predicted value in common GWASs-i.e., only ~5% of the phenotypic variance in human height [27].
The present studies aim at predicting genetic values using the covariance structures between SNPs via GRM [28]. The numerator relationship matrix can be replaced by a genome-based GRM [29]. This G-BLUP, using GRM, uses information of SNPs [30]. We used three methods-particularly, the method of normal distribution-based SNP-SNP covariance structures. These structures were constructed using GRM and the Z design matrix. Algorithmically, the calculation of GRM uses the frequency of genotyped SNPs and the Z matrix. Also, in the previous study, the SNP-SNP covariance structures assumed that the identity matrix was multiplied by proper constants. However, we calculated the SNP-SNP relationship matrix using GRM and the Z matrix. This square matrix contains the information of relations between SNPs and can make it possible to estimate the SNP effects. Also, adequate use of the SMW lemma could make it plausible to estimate the SNP effects and genetic values simultaneously with faster computation time [21]. We expect that SNP-SNP covariance structures can make it feasible for calculating the genetic values and SNP effects that are linked to the QTL more accurately.
Genetic value estimation combines the performance and kinship information, which is based on a known pedigree [31]. The accuracy of genomic prediction depends on many factors, such as the genetic architecture of the trait and the population, the methodology of estimating the SNP effects, the distribution of the markers, and the degree of LD [32]. These can be important for accurate BLUP analysis, and there can be two approaches for solving BLUP. The GLS approach and Henderson's ML-based approach lead to identical solutions. The "rrBLUP" package uses the GLS approach. In that package, when the GRM is calculated, the imputation uses the mean method or EM algorithm. Especially, the EM algorithm can be used for haplotype inferences with SNPs. The EM algorithm is the most popular statistical algorithm because of its interpretability and stability. This algorithm is a deterministic procedure, consumes less computation time, and is easier for convergence checks [33]. The REML method is used in BLUP analysis with a small sample size. The use of REML for variance component estimation avoids the small sample bias associated with fixed effects and seems to avoid selection bias. Henderson [34] asserted the use of REML in BLUP models [35, 36]. Thus, we used the EM algorithm and REML method schemes.