New-generation sequencing technologies have substantially enhanced the development of genomic tools to assist in breeding decisions. Among many techniques, genotyping technologies have enabled breeders or researchers to identify DNA regions or quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with a particular phenotypic trait of domesticated animals. Especially, several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and QTL associated with Holstein complex traits, including economic traits related to milk production, were investigated in the approximate 10-year wave of genome-wide association studies (GWASs) [123]. In the near past, researchers discovered genetic markers and created marker panels for use in performing marker-assisted selection (MAS). Although MAS provided a first genomic approach to achieve breeding goals to animal breeders, the domesticated animal genome in MAS was taken lightly with narrow perspectives. MAS is restricted when it comes to predicting animal capacity, as it depends on a small number of QTLs that are tagged by markers associated with each trait [4]. Additionally, the gap between the proportion of phenotypic variance accounted for by the top SNPs that reach genome-wide significance level in a GWAS and the heritability estimated from pedigree analyses remained unexplained for most complex traits of human. This was called the missing heritability problem [5], explanations to which have been debated in the field [6].
Recent studies using whole-genome estimation approaches demonstrated that a large proportion of heritability for complex traits of humans can be captured by all common SNPs on current genotyping arrays. It implies that there are a large number of variants with an effect that is too small to pass the stringent genome-wide significance level. In animal breeding, genomics selection (GS) has been developed to overcome restriction factors of MAS; it has covered a large number of variants containing small effects. The fundamental difference between MAS and GS as important animal selection tools is that scale GS embraces a much larger number of markers than MAS in predicting animal capacity. GS uses a dense set of markers from across the entire genome to use all markers containing SNPs with small effects. This feature gives GS a profound advantage over MAS.
For predictions based on genomic data for humans, a previous study has already estimated the proportion of phenotypic variance. It was elucidated by the common SNPs all together on a genotyping array for a range of quantitative traits in a large homogenous human sample, using the whole-genome estimation and partitioning approaches [7]. The novelty of our research lies in animal capacity prediction based on genomic data due to the fact that animal evaluation is a core content in the breeding industry. Finally, to conduct our animal breeding research on polygenic inheritance, which was likely to be ubiquitous for complex Holstein traits associated with milk production traits, the genomic selection technique was performed along with various different analyses.