Genome-wide association study (GWAS)
The GWAS measures DNA sequence variations in the human genome to identify associations between genetic variants and diseases (or phenotypes). To measure genetic variations, the single- nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), which represents a single base-pair change in the DNA sequence, is generally used as a marker of a genomic region in the GWAS. Generally, the GWAS conducts a comparison of the SNPs between case and control groups (i.e., disease and non-disease groups) by statistical methods, such as ANOVA and logistic regression, to identify significant SNPs related to the disease. Genetic risk factors revealed by a GWAS can be used as preventive markers or for therapeutic targets in curing the disease. There have been more than 11,000 SNPs discovered as candidate bio-markers in common diseases [100]. The large number of SNPs detectable in the human genome can, however, lead to multiple testing problems. To control the false positive errors (i.e., type I errors in the context of statistical testing procedures), the Bonferroni correction and false discovery rate [101] methods are commonly adopted. Although these multiple testing rules have been successful in the identification of significant single SNPs, these test procedures often fail to detect genomic regions that are weakly associated with the disease and still ignore the combined effects caused by the interactions between genes.
The network-based GWAS methods [102-104], summarized in Table 5 [12, 13, 17, 102-114], take into account both interactions between genes or proteins with association information available from a GWAS. The HumanNet method [115] combines functional gene networks derived from multiple network sources, such as the PPI network, and mRNA co-expression with the log odds ratio from GWAS data to prioritize disease genes. By combining functional gene networks and the information from GWAS data, HumanNet has higher power to detect disease-related genes. Unlike HumanNet, NIMMI [116] and dmGWAS [117] focus on identifying groups of genes associated with diseases, based on GWAS data and PPI network data. NIMMI constructs a PPI network with weights of genes by using a modified Google PageRank algorithm [118]. The weights of genes are then combined with the gene-based association p-values calculated from GWAS data. The subnetworks of genes are identified by the DAVID method [119, 120] with the network structure and weights of genes. On the other hand, dmGWAS only considers gene-based association p-values as the node weights and proposes a modified version of the dense module searching method [121] to prioritize candidate groups of genes.