DNA methylation
One of the more stable and heritable epigenetic marks is DNA methylation. The human genome is highly methylated; approximately 80% of cytosines in CpG dinucleotides are chemically modified at their fifth carbon atom with a methyl group [35]. Historically, DNA methylation was associated with transcriptional silencing (as evidenced by many promoter-based studies) [36]. Although genome-scale profiling of this epigenetic mark revealed that in some instances DNA methylation is correlated with transcriptional activation, it is enriched in the gene bodies of active genes [37]. Thus, the associations between an epigenomic mark and functional output may be location-specific, thereby complicating their functional interpretation.
The available assays for identifying methylated CpG dinucleotides in a genome vary in terms of resolution and cost. Restriction enzyme-based assays (e.g., methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme sequencing) involve the digestion of genomic DNA with several methylation-sensitive enzymes [15], followed by sequencing of digested fragments. Affinity-based enrichment assays, such as methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing and methyl-CpG-binding domain protein sequencing [16, 17], selectively target methylated fragments (usually up to 100 bp) using an antibody, followed by sequencing of those fragments. Both these methods are low-resolution and essentially qualitative. Chemical modification methods, such as bisulfite sequencing (BS), have higher resolution and provide quantitative estimates of methylation. They exploit the fact that when treated with sodium bisulfite, unmethylated cytosines convert to uracil while methylated cytosines do not. Thus, mapping of sequenced fragments reveals the quantitative estimate of methylation at each CpG locus. The two variations to BS include reduced representation BS and whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, or methylC-seq (whole-genome BS); the former employs restriction enzyme digestion to target certain regions of interest prior to sodium bisulfite treatment [18], whereas the latter couples the chemical treatment with whole-genome sequencing [19].
Upon the discovery that 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC: an intermediate produced during active DNA demethylation) and 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) are both resistant to bisulfite treatment, it became critical to distinguish between the different methyl variants, including 5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. To this end, oxidative bisulfite sequencing (oxBS-seq) was invented as an improvement for methylC-seq to measure single base-pair resolution methylation levels of 5-mC [20]. This is accomplished by oxidizing 5-hmCs (using potassium perruthenate) before sodium bisulfite treatment, such that they are now sensitive to the subjected chemical conversion to uracil, thus ensuring that the remaining cytosines are all 5-mCs.