ChIP-Seq is one of major applications using next-generation sequencing technology and provides valuable information on DNA-protein interactions and epigenomic modifications. Due to its high volume of sequence data, most ChIP-Seq data analysis is performed in Unix/Linux or equivalent environments (e.g., Mac OS X). Considering that the Microsoft Windows operating system (OS) still dominates the market share of the PC OS, it would be helpful to have a ChIP-Seq data analysis pipeline that can be run on Windows OS without the use of a Unix-like OS environment.
In this regard, R/Bioconductor provides an excellent opportunity to make an analysis pipeline in an OS-independent manner. First, R/Bioconductor is available for all major platforms (Windows, Mac OS X, and most Linux). Second, most R/Bioconductor packages and scripts can be run across different OS platforms without any modifications. Third, the Bioconductor is an open-source, interdisciplinary, and collaborative software project for the analysis and comprehension of high-throughput data in genomics and molecular biology and provides a lot of useful packages for genomic data analysis [15]. Thus, many useful analysis pipelines can be constructed by deliberately selecting adequate packages among thousands of available high-quality packages. Fourth, R/Bioconductor provides many sophisticated statistical analysis and visualization tools. Indeed, R/Bioconductor is one of the most versatile and advanced visualization systems; so, many high-quality plots in the scientific community are produced using R/Bioconductor.
In this work, we presented a ChIP-Seq data analysis pipeline using only four Bioconductor packages. The entire workflow took only about 2 h in the Windows 7 OS with two Intel i7 quad-cores (3.4 GHz) and 16 GB RAM. Thus, for ChIP-Seq data analysis, we insist that high-end workstations and servers with UNIX-like environments are not mandatory any longer. With careful selection of packages and tools, it is possible to construct an efficient data analysis pipeline on a PC machine. Although more than 60 packages are available for ChIP-Seq data analysis, we deliberately selected four packages to encompass all the necessary steps of ChIP-Seq data analyses, including trimming, mapping and QC, peak calling, peak annotation, and visualization. However, we acknowledge that many other packages with similar functions are also available and can thus be used to construct alternative data analysis pipelines.
In the next version, we will add an option to choose a peak calling algorithm with various statistical analysis options from diverse programs. We hope that our work will help most biologists perform ChIP-Seq data analysis without setting up additional Unix-like environments.