Visual analysis of GOI
The traditional methods usually use heatmaps to show all probe sets or genes in the datasets. Although this approach can show the overview, its visualizations are very dense. It makes it really difficult to analyze those important genes in detail from the crowded population. Our system innovatively focuses the interactive visualization of the GOI resulting from the automated analysis. By reducing the overhead of analyzing a large quantity of genes, the analysts can easily compare the GOI through a large population of patients.
The Gene Comparison Interactive Visualization is designed to allow an analyst to drill down further into the genetics and treatment data of patients identified as significant by the processes described in the previous sections. This visualization implements several mechanisms whereby the similarity and differences between patients and groups of patients can be examined in greater detail.
An important feature of this interactive visualization is the use of active regions to indicate what the analyst is currently focused on. Knowing this makes it possible to infer what extra information the analyst might find useful and to make sure that it is available. This interactive visualization consists of 5 separate visual components: A) the primary patient probe set heatmap component, B) the gene zoom component, C) the color gradient and Gaussian curve component, D) the gene ontology and probe set annotation component, and E) the patient biomedical data component (see Fig. 10).
These 5 components are designed to interact with each other as well as other components, including the "Patient-to-Patient Visual Analysis" (described in section 6) and the main visualization (described in section 5) in several different ways to assist the analyst to examine the similarities and differences between significant patients and significant groups of patients. Fig. 11 presents an overview of the visualization of the entire Genes of Interest Visual Analysis module when the 3 patients highlighted in the similarity space are added. Please note that the figure shows both the probe set heatmap component and the patient information component.