A composite trait of 18 classes, constructed with 3 observables, each of which had 3 or 2 classes, was analyzed with genomic data to estimate the genome-wide association. Gene-gene interactions, as well as the main effect, were investigated. It may be essential to take a multi-class composite phenotype into consideration when performing a genomic association study for the susceptibility to a more complex disease, such as diabetes, as presented in this paper. OGTT-2h alone has 3 categories that exceed the commonly used dichotomous classes. However, the intrinsic need of a composite phenotype comes from the fact that diabetes may not be fully diagnosed with a single observable. If a disease may be diagnosed by multiple variables, it would be logical to analyze the susceptibility to it with multiple observables concurrently. A composite phenotype can be expected to have many classes, and the number of them could grow rapidly as the number of required variables increases. Therefore, it would be essential to have a methodology capable of analyzing the genomic association with a phenotype having an indefinite number of classes. GIDS has been demonstrated, in this paper, as a reliable candidate for this purpose. It showed consistency by identifying strongly associated SNPs, in chromosome 6, agreeing with previously reported ones in a single-locus model. The CDKAL1 gene, in which they are located, has been found to be responsible for the SNPs that cause the susceptibility to type II diabetes. Moreover, we found new SNPs that have not been reported to have a strong association. They were found in chromosomes 8 and 18. The gene-gene interaction result detected a single prominent SNP pair that was noticeably stronger than others. Although 1 of the 2 SNPs in that pair, rs6486740 in the GLT1D1 gene, was not found to have a strong main effect, it showed a very strong association when it interacted with the counterpart SNP, rs2328549.
In summary, we have confirmed previous results and at the same time found new strong genomic associations in both single- and 2-locus models by applying GIDS to a composite trait with 18 classes.