The development of viral metagenomics has facilitated the discovery of novel, previously undescribed viral species. An artifact of the MDA method is that it selectively amplifies the circular genomes of ssDNA viruses, so that a large number of ssDNA viral sequences have been identified in environmental viromes. Thus, there is great interest in the distribution and host range of ssDNA viruses. In particular, microphages from the family Microviridae have been identified in a wide range of environments [13, 45, 46]. In contrast to the ecology of marine dsDNA phages, marine ssDNA phages in the family Microviridae have distinct spatial and temporal distributions [45]. ssDNA microphages were abundant in the healthy human gut and their genotypes were much more diverse than those reported previously [13]. Moreover, prophage-like elements in the genomes of gut microbes, such as Bacteroides and Prevotella spp., were characterized as a novel subgroup in the family Microviridae [13, 47], while viral sequences from the human gut were clustered with prophage-like elements from Bacteroides and Prevotella spp. [13]. This suggests that Bacteroides and Prevotella spp. are included within the host range of the ssDNA microphages in the human gut [47].
Eukaryotic ssDNA viruses that infect plants and mammals have been identified in many environmental viromes. Circoviruses that are known to infect birds and pigs have also been identified in the viromes of invertebrates and a fish [48, 49], while geminiviruses that cause plant diseases have been detected in whiteflies, which act as insect vectors of plant viruses [50]. A recent study by Whon et al. [9] investigated airborne DNA viral assemblages in near-surface atmosphere samples and showed that a high number of viruses (log 6 to 7 viruses per m3) were present in the air, which were dominated by geminivirus-related viruses. These viruses were identified as plant fungal pathogen-infecting mycoviruses-i.e., Sclerotinia sclerotiorum hypovirulence-associated DNA virus 1-which indicates that the airborne viral assemblages in the near-surface atmosphere may have strong interactions with plants. These results highlight the extensive distribution of ssDNA viruses in a wide range of environments, and their host ranges may be wider than previously recognized. Thus, the discovery of novel genomes of ssDNA viral families in metagenomic studies could revolutionize our knowledge of the ecology and evolution of ssDNA viruses.