We have reviewed a number of methods related to two topics in network data analysis: network reconstruction and network-based application. Network reconstruction can be thought of as a reverse-engineering problem whose goal is to rebuild true structures or relationships from observations. In particular, we focused on statistical methods for building GRNs, including the Gaussian graphical model, correlation network, Bayesian network, and information theory-based methods. Most methods that we have reviewed consider the sparsity on the graph structure to select a small number of significant dependencies between nodes. This sparsity condition is adequate for the network in biological systems, since it reflects a scale-free feature, where several nodes have many edges but the majority of nodes only has three or four edges [5]. Although most methods in Gaussian graphical models are well studied in their theoretical properties, these methods have limitations when applied to biological data. Since these methods basically assume a Gaussian distribution, they are only applicable for continuous-type datasets, such as gene expression levels. To construct networks from other types of data, such as binary or counts, the Bayesian network and information theory-based methods are more attractive than correlation-based methods.
Second, we introduced various methods in three network-based applications. Most methods consider similarity measures between nodes and then use these measures to predict biological functions or prioritize candidate genes associated with diseases. As technologies in the experiments progress, the network-based methods can be improved and widely extended. For instance, even though the neighborhood counting method [1] in protein function prediction only considers the count of annotated functions in the neighborhood from a PPI network, the recently developed methods [72, 83] can contain not only neighborhood information but also functional similarities from multiple networks. In addition, module-assisted methods that focus on identifying a functional group of proteins are also available and well summarized in [122]. Furthermore, the network-based tumor stratification (NBS) method has been developed recently [123]. This NBS method combines mutation profiles from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) projects [116, 117, 124, 125] and network information to obtain informative strata (e.g., subtypes of cancer). Although these network-based methods have been improved, these methods still lack accuracy compared with other methods [115]. Since the high-throughput data may contain many false positives [126], the network-based methods are affected in their accuracy. Although their performance depends on the quality of data, their effects are expected to decrease in the future as improvements are made in measurement accuracy.