Facial measurements
Digital photographs used for facial measurements have the advantages of obtaining quick and permanent data [20]. To minimize the potential variability in the measurements among different centers, a single digital camera, with a standard protocol, was employed throughout the collection of data. To correct for distance variable, a standard sliding caliper was held by the subjects while taking photographs. The resulting images were sent to KIOM from each center.
Twenty-five landmarks were selected and produced as described [21] using Image J program, an image processing program developed by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (Fig. 1). Each of these landmarks was recorded as coordinates in this program. A single measurement can be generated, representing the shortest distance between any of the 2 landmark coordinates of choice. Fourteen of such measurements described below were selected, which best represented the facial characteristic [21].
A total of 14 facial measurements in 5 regions (head and face, orbital, nose, mouth, and ears) were evaluated. For the head and face region, 6 measurements (physiognomical height of the face [tr-gn], height of the forehead I [tr-g], special upper face height [g-sn], height of the lower face [sn-gn], width of the face [zy-zy], and width of the mandible [go-go]) were recorded. Three measurements were collected from the orbital region: intercanthal width (en-en), binocular width (ex-ex), and length of the eye fissure (en-ex). The nose region had 3 measurements: height of the nose (n-sn), width of the nose (al-al), and nasal protrusion (sn-prn). One measurement each was taken from the mouth and ear regions: width of the mouth (ch-ch) and length of the auricle (sa-sba) (Table 1, Fig. 1).
To minimize intermeasurement bias, all the measurements were taken by a single, well-trained personnel. To verify the robustness and reliability of the measurement method employed herein, we also recorded the intraobserver precision of all 14 measurements on the 20 subsamples, of which age and sex were taken into consideration. The resulting mean intracorrelation coefficient was 0.93 (0.80-0.99), showing high reliability.