Although there are more international norms besides the seven standards introduced in this article and will be more, a set of currently recognized, common ethical principles regarding genetics and genomics can be drawn from these standards (Table 1). There are hardly any clashes over the main principles or attitudes towards the human genome among these norms. Small differences, which are mostly found in details, have resulted from adding new principles and details, rather than changing or negating the previously declared principles.
Keeping these principles in mind, let us go back to Dewey-Hagborg's project. The action concerned is the genetic testing of abandoned DNA without the donor's consent. Did the artist violate their human rights, especially fundamental freedom, by testing their genomes without consent? Since the artist does not know their identity, she could not obtain their consent. One protocol provides ideas for cases when it is not possible to contact a person for a genetic test. It says that the law may allow the test to be carried out when the testing is for the benefit of family member(s) on his or her biological material previously sampled for another purpose and when the expected benefit cannot be otherwise obtained and where the test cannot be deferred [9]. Therefore, Dewey-Hagborg's action seems unlikely to be justified. In addition, from a legal perspective, New York's law outlaws most DNA testing without written consent, and the United Kingdom also outlawed non-consensual DNA testing in 2006. However, the legal status of DNA retrieved in the environment is uncertain in many jurisdictions. Another important question is whether the testing infringed their privacy. Since the individuals concerned are unlikely to be recognizable from the sculptures, the artist argues that her project does not invade privacy. Then, what if it is technically possible to identify the donor or is possible in the near future? Does it change the nature of the action? To all these questions, there may not be one correct answer at all or there can be many alternative answers to each question. For most ethical dilemmas, the first step to find good answers to them is to have ethical sensitivity-the ability to perceive ethical problems as ethical problems. After that, continuous, open, multidisciplinary, transcultural dialog will greatly help our journey, and our colleagues will be very reliable companions.