Estimating Ne based on HWE deviations, LE deviations, and LD decay
Based on the formula for testing HWE [31], estimating the effective population sizes of current populations utilizes the deviations of HWE, as shown in Eq. (1) from a previous study [13]. (1) where n is the sample size, and the expectation indicates the mean value of HWE deviations. AA is the observed genotype frequency of a variant, and AA is the observed allele frequency of a variant. The same as the HapMap data, the KARE data excluded variants that deviated from HWE for a significance level of 0.001. Therefore, similar to the previous study, the mean of the HWE deviations should be adjusted by dividing the mean by the correction term of 0.9873 [13].
A variant in a chromosome is in LE with a variant in another chromosome; however, the random genetic drift induces deviation from LE. The deviations depend on the effective population size of recent generations, and the recent effective population size can be estimated using the deviations. Assuming a constant population size, the effective population size that reflects recent changes in population size (the recent Ne) can be estimated based on Eq. (2), which was derived in a previous study [13]. The estimate is different from the inbreeding Ne estimate using unlinked loci [9, 32]. (2) where n indicates the sample size. As indicated previously [13], the correction due to sampling involves 1/2Ne, in addition to 1/n, because the haplotype frequencies were estimated using maximum likelihood estimation [9, 33, 34]. If the haplotypes are derived directly from the genotyping or sequencing, the correction term due to sampling should be 1/n.
The decay of LD between linked loci is different, depending on the recombination rate. Based on this information, the past population history can be inferred. The LD estimates at a certain recombination rate contain the influences of all Ne values from the current to a certain number of past generations [14]. Therefore, the previous study showed that the changes of Ne estimates, depending on recombination rate, just represent an overall picture of past population history by comparing the actual estimates to the estimates of various past population histories. Similar to the previous study, the effective population sizes were estimated using the linked variants, depending on the recombination rates, between the variants (Eqs. 1 and 3-5). Following the previous assumptions [13, 34], constant population sizes and LD at equilibrium were assumed. (3)
Eq. (3) presents the relationship between LD estimates at equilibrium (r2eq), Ne, and recombination rate (C). The LD estimates in Eq. (3) indicate the estimates of the original population, excluding the sampling bias. Sampling causes more complicated relationships in the LD estimates of the linked variants than the LD estimates of unlinked variants, due to the maximum likelihood estimation of haplotype frequencies [14]. Therefore, as shown in Eq. (4), the LD estimates of sampled populations (r2s) include the influence of the Ne of the original population instead of a simpler factor, 1/(2ns), in addition to the influence of sample size (ns) and the LD estimates of the original population (r2o). (4)
To eliminate sampling bias, the Ne of the original population should be known. It is possible to combine and solve Eqs. (3) and (4) for a given ns and r2s. A better way is to use the Ne estimate of the current generation (Eq. 1) in the recurrent formula in a previous study [14]. By doing so, Eq. (5) was derived. (5)
In Eq. (5), Ne indicates the effective population size at equilibrium for recombination rate (C); Nec indicates the effective population size of the current generation from Eq. (1); r2o indicates the LD estimates of the original population; and r2eq indicates the LD estimates at equilibrium from the generation when the LD estimates reached equilibrium to the previous generation right before the current generation -i.e., the parent generation. Therefore, to estimate Ne at equilibrium for a certain recombination rate, Nec should be estimated first. The estimated Nec is incorporated into Eq. (4) to derive r2o. In Eq. (5), substituting r2eq with the expression in Eq. (3) provides a cubic equation of Ne in which Ne can be solvable. The Ne estimates could be examined, depending on various recombination rates, to infer past population histories in which the impact of current Ne was excluded.