All eukaryotic genomes contain introns within their gene structures [1,2]. It has long been a mystery how cells have maintained such a seemingly burdensome entity over the time scale of evolutionary processes [3-8]. Recent high-throughput genomic technologies based on next-generation sequencing have helped to prove that intron sites are in fact subject to natural selection. In other words, introns play functional roles in various aspects of molecular dynamics occurring inside cells, such as regulation of gene expression, primary transcript splicing, and mRNA stability [9].
We have previously reported some evidence on the functional roles of introns—more specifically, the first ordinally positioned introns (referred to as first introns)—in regulating gene expression [10,11]. Briefly, we investigated whether first introns were conserved to a significantly greater extent than other downstream introns [10]. In addition, we showed that the greater conservation of first introns, associated with a greater number of epigenetic marks, was independent of the conservation of the 5' flanking or promoter regions of genes [10]. In other words, the signatures that we found in the first introns were not a spillover effect of the promoter or 5′ flanking regions of the genes. Moreover, we expanded our first study on introns by adding more multi-omics data, coupled with the enrichment of epigenetic marks in the first introns [11]. In that study, we showed that trait-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (TASs) were significantly more enriched in first introns than would be expected by random chance. Second, we showed that patterns of epigenetic signals varied by expression specificity or gene essentiality. Third, we expanded the depth of our analysis to show that genes carrying multiple first-intron TASs constituted a large protein-protein interaction network with each other, ultimately connecting to the UBC protein, which plays a well-established role in ubiquitination.
Several other recent reports have confirmed the functional importance of introns, particularly first introns, in regulating gene expression. For instance, the first intron of the Col1A1 gene in mice was found to play a role in tissue-specific and developmental gene expression [12]. Similarly, the first introns of PRF1 and PRF2 in Arabidopsis thaliana were observed to affect constitutive gene expression in vegetative tissues [13]. The determination of the transcription start site of the UBC gene was found to be dependent on the presence of its first intron [14].
In the present work, we sought to provide further evidence on the functionality of first introns, by investigating whether rare alleles located in the sites overlaying epigenomic marks in first introns were more enriched than in 2-kb upstream sequences and other downstream introns.