Microarray-based technologies
Microarray technology has been used extensively to gather global-scale data from cell lines or tissues of interest. This technology was first used to make a quantitative assessment of mRNAs or non-coding RNAs. Gene expression profiling studies based on microarray technologies have identified conserved gene expression signatures that are significantly related with clinical outcomes or pathological phenotypes and have uncovered many subgroups of cancer that were not recognized with conventional approaches in a variety of cancers [16-18]. These approaches have been used successfully to identify therapeutic targets for various cancers and to predict overall survival or recurrence-free survival rates of cancer patients [19-21].
Use of microarray technology is not restricted to genome-wide gene expression profiling of cells or tissues but expands to uncovering single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with cancer risk, methylation status of gene promoters, DNA copy number alterations, protein expression profiling, and re-sequencing of cancer genomes. Because microarray-based CGH can provide copy-number analyses with much higher resolution than conventional CGH, it has quickly replaced conventional CGH [22, 23].
Microarray technologies were also adopted by the proteomics community. Protein microarray was quickly established by rapid improvements to miniaturizing western blotting and tissue lysate dotting technologies onto solid surfaces. There are two different experimental approaches for protein arrays: forward-phase protein array (FPPA) and reverse-phase protein array (RPPA). In FPPA, antibodies or polypeptides are printed on the slide surface, and each slide?is incubated with labeled tissue or cell lysate. This approach allows one to simultaneously measure multiple protein features, such as expression, interaction with peptide ligands, and protein phosphorylation, from the samples. In RPPA, an individual tissue lysate in printed on the slide surface, and each RPPA slide consists of hundreds or thousands of tissue samples. Each slide is then probed with one peptide ligand or antibody at a time, and a protein feature of interest is assessed and compared across many tissues or cell lines. Because RPPA needs only several thousands of cells to collect high-quality data, it is better suited for cancer research. In contrast, FPPA is not suitable for tissue-based studies, because it needs a large quantity of tissue or cell lysate for detection [24-27].