Human papillomavirus (HPV), a virus from the papillomavirus family, accounts for 5.2% of all cancers worldwide and is also the causative agent of a subset of anogenital, head and neck cancers, and cervical cancer [1, 2]. Amongst these, cervical cancer contributes the most to cancer mortality in women worldwide, with an estimated 49,300 diagnoses and 274,000 deaths annually [3]. Although there are more than 200 types of HPV identified, the most commonly associated with cervical cancer are 'high-risk' HPV-16 and HPV-18, responsible for about 62.6% and 15.7% of cervical cancers, respectively [4]. Besides, among all the HPV-associated cancers, the proportion attributable to HPV types 16 and 18 is 63-80% of penile cancers, 80-86% of vulva/vaginal cancers, 93% of anal cancers, and 89-95% of oropharyngeal cancers [5]. HPV-16 and HPV-18 remain the primary targets for anticancer drug development.
The E6 and E7 onco-proteins have been shown to interact specifically with the p53 and pRb tumor suppressor proteins, respectively [6]. Both pRb and p53 negatively regulate the cell cycle and also appear to inhibit G0-G1 and G1-S phase transitions. These interactions apparently play important roles in the induction of cell immortality. The importance of p53-mediated apoptosis has been recognized in terms of the maintenance of homeostasis, as well as the prevention of neoplastic transformation. E6 forms a ternary complex with p53 and E6AP (E6 associated protein), resulting in the degradation of p53 via the ubiquitination pathway [7].
HPV has been known as a causative agent for cervical cancer for 3 decades, but effective treatment against HPV infection is still unavailable [8]. Natural products have been identified as promising sources of drugs for treatment and prevention of cancer in recent years [9].
Carrageenan is known to prevent the binding of HPV virions to cells. It can also block HPV infection through a second, post attachment heparan sulfate-independent effect [10].
Bava et al. [11] demonstrated that curcumin sensitizes cervical cancer cells to the therapeutic effect of taxol, acting in the down-regulation of both nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and the threonine/serine kinase AKT pathway. Curcumin is cytotoxic to cervical cancer cells in a concentration-dependent and time-dependent manner, and the cytotoxicity is higher in HPV-infected cells. The authors confirmed the inhibitory action of curcumin on NF-κB activation, through the degradation of IκB, and on AP-1 binding, which results in the downregulation of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and increased tumor cell apoptosis [11]. Moreover, it was shown that curcumin downregulates the expression of E6 and E7 proteins of HPV-16, resulting in loss of the transforming phenotype and the cessation of cellular growth. Singh and Singh [12] explored other molecular mechanisms exerted by curcumin in cervical cancer cells, showing that it inhibits telomerase activity, the RAS and ERK signaling pathway, cyclin D1, COX-2, and inducible nitric oxide synthase activity.
Withaferin A (WA) is the major active component of the Indian medicinal plant Withania somnifera, with antitumor, antiangiogenic, and radiosensitizing activity [13, 14]. An in vitro and in vivo study conducted by Munagala et al. [15] showed the inhibitory effect of WA against the proliferation of cervical cancer cells. WA was shown to downregulate the expression of HPV E6 oncoprotein and restore the p53 pathway, resulting in apoptosis of cervical cancer cells [15].
(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the most abundant and active tea catechin, has antiviral and antitumor properties. According to a clinical study, EGCG was effective in patients with HPV-infected cervical lesions when delivered in the form of ointment or capsule [16]. A study conducted by Qiao et al. [17] showed the inhibition effect of EGCG on the growth of CaSki (HPV-16 positive) and HeLa (HPV-18 positive) cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Their results also observed that EGCG could inhibit the expression of HPV E6/E7. Lee et al. [18] isolated jaceosidin from the methanol (MeOH) extract of Artemisia argyi and reported its inhibitory effects on binding between oncoproteins and tumor suppressor p53. Indole-3-carbinol (I3C), found in cruciferous vegetables, such as cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, and brussel sprouts,was demonstrated to have anti-estrogenic activities in cervical cells [19].
The purpose of this in silico study was to observe the interaction between active compounds obtained from natural products used for the treatment against HPV. In this study, a three-dimensional structure of E6 protein of HPV type 16 was modeled using the Phyre 2 server, and structural refinement and energy minimization were performed by the YASARA Energy Minimization Server. In order to reveal the interaction between E6 oncoprotein with natural ligands, docking analysis was performed using the AutoDock tool.