Transposition of a dTE molecule in FBI DNA configuration is tested by a space filling model, as presented in Fig. 1 and as a detailed diagram in Fig. 2 [30]. The TE molecule, detached from the host by a DSB in a blunt end cut, approaches, as shown in the diagram, at a perpendicular angle to the target site. Both 3'-OH ends of the TE ligate with the 5'-P ends of the staggered-cut target, leaving the overhang target ends single-stranded, which would be repaired by gap filling. As shown in the diagram (Fig. 2), when the TE ends approach the target on the minor groove side, the target size would be 5 bp on the minor groove side and 7 bp on the major groove side. This explains the meaning of the average size of the 5-7-bp target duplication, as it matches the diameter of the incoming intercoil DNA, 2.2 nm. In reality, the target sizes vary between 2 to even over 10 bp in a TE superfamily-specific manner. This TSD size variation could be explained by several factors-namely, local squeeze and stretch of the DNA double helix; unequal cutting positions of the TE ends, as exemplified in Tn7 by the 3-nt overhang by staggered DSB [14]; the characteristics of the endonucleases involved; and even temporary loosening of the intercoil end during a very elaborate and concerted coordination of the transpososome structure [8].
In earlier days, when IS and Tn, and even the LTR retrotransposons, were the major players of transposition, it was the presence of terminal repeats that attracted attention for explaining the transpositional mechanism, as in homologous recombination. Therefore, it was somewhat puzzling to explain the cases of non-LTR retrotransposons with asymmetric termini sequences. But, it is now TSD that attracts attention as a common factor for the transposition mechanism of all TEs, except for Helitrons. It is the structural nature of the intercoil, which is formed by intertwining duplexes, regardless of the homology between the two termini. When both ends of a TE synapse in the form of an intercoil, are cut by a DSB off the host duplex strand, and approach the target in perpendicular direction, their 3'-OH ends ligate to the staggered 5'-P ends of the broken target. The resulting overhang single-strand DNA gaps on both flanking ends of the target are repaired to generate the accompanying TSD. The significance of the terminal repeats is then the homologous recombination that is required for further transactions of recombination, replication, and transcription.