Mutation rates include genetic changes such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), copy number variations (CNVs), insertion/deletions (indels), microsatellites and minisatellites. Specifically, the subset of the total mutation rate caused by SNPs is called the substitution rate. Rate of point mutation can be determined indirectly by estimating neutral substitution rates [1]. In spite of the importance of substitution rates, there have been few investigations to date. We estimated the substitution rates of Hanwoo and Holstein cattle using the concept of the hidden substitution factor (HSF). The vast number of SNPs in next-generation sequencing (NGS) require the use of HSF to estimate the substitution rate. We defined the HSF as an independent unit for substitution rate in any lineage. For instance, the initial founder number is the HSF if the effective population size has been maintained as a constant. Otherwise, HSF is related to both founder number and effective population size. Using HSF, we estimated the genetic substitution rates of the genes of the Hanwoo and Holstein breeds in Korea.
Kumar and Subramanian [1] estimated the substitution rate in the mammalian genes using amino acid degenerate sites and evolutionary distance. Lee et al. [2] obtained the nonsynonymous SNPs, splice-site variants and coding indels in the Bovine genome including Hanwoo. They used whole-genome resequencing. Melka et al. [3] used Bovine SNP 50 beadchip to identify genomic differences between Hanwoo and Holstein. In our analysis, we used whole-genome sequencing to estimate substitution rates of Hanwoo and Holstein and identified genomic differences between Hanwoo and Holstein using gene ontology (GO) analysis. Our novel approach was to use intraspecies substitution rate estimation by inserting HSF into the evolutionary distance. HSF of Hanwoo is closely related to the initial found number that was caused by migration into Korean peninsula. We hypothesized that initial founder number was more than 1 [1-3].
Hanwoo designates the native, taurine type of Korean cattle. The breed originated approximately 4,000 years ago. The production of Hanwoo as the main beef cattle has occurred since the 1960s with the rapid growth of the Korean economy. The tasty beef from Hanwoo cattle is popular among Koreans and foreigners. Holstein-Friesian cattle represents the famous milk producing breeds. The holstein was introduced to Korea in 1902, and the Korean cattle industry has developed rapidly since 1960 [4-6]. Hanwoo and Holstein are very important in cattle industry in Korea.
We estimated the evolutionary distance of Holstein and Hanwoo using the number of SNPs, and HSF. Evolutionary distance refers to the cumulative change between DNA or protein sequences that were derived from a common ancestor. There were various methods to estimate it such as JC69 model, Kimura-2-parameter model (K2P), F81 model, HKY85 model. K2P used transition/transversion ratio (tr/tv ratio) to estimate the evolutionary distance. It is moderately complex model [7-10]. We assumed that the evolutionary distance had a linear relationship to HSF. The generation times of Hanwoo and Holstein were set to be 5 years. Then, the genetic substitution rates of the genes were calculated and those features were surveyed.