Southeast Asia, together with the Island Pacific region, is a cultural melting pot of migrating Neolithic farmers and indigenous Mesolithic hunter-gatherer communities. On the basis of increased cultural, linguistic, and genetic diversity, the origins of Southeast Asian populations are thought to be more complex than those to their north. Two major prehistoric movements of people had great influence on the linguistic, cultural, and genetic diversity of the region. The first colonization of modern humans in the region was around 45,000 years before the present [77], which could have brought the ancestors of modern Papuans and Australians into the region [78]. Notably, archaeological evidence has confirmed human habitation in Eastern Indonesia as far back as 32,000 years ago [79]. The second major human migration event, which is often termed the Austronesian expansion, was relatively recent, coinciding with the first agricultural settlements in Island Southeast Asia (ISEA) [80]; it is often putatively linked to demic dispersal from mainland China during the Mid-Holocene [81], and based on linguistic studies, the Austronesian expansion is proposed to have originated in Taiwan around 5,000-6,000 years ago and spread to Southeast Asia, Near and Remote Oceania, and Madagascar [82, 83]. However, our knowledge about the historical origin and spread of Austronesian-speaking peoples has been overwhelmingly from linguistic, archeological, and anthropological studies, while contributions from genetic studies are limited, and especially, genetic dating of the expansion time of Austronesians is almost absent [84].
Undoubtedly, the Austronesian expansion has had a major cultural influence on Asia-Pacific pre-history. The biological contribution of Austronesian-speaking peoples to the pre-existing local populations in ISEA was first noted by Wallace in 1869 [85]. As Wallace observed, people in the region between mainland Asia and New Guinea in the west are similar to their neighbors in mainland Southeast Asia, while the eastern groups near New Guinea are similar to Melanesians, leaving intervening populations intermediate in appearance [85]. This admixture pattern was revealed by mtDNA and non-recombining region of the Y chromosome (NRY) studies [86, 87] as well as by a recent study [81] based on multiple autosomal and X-chromosomal SNPs.
The genetic admixture with local populations during the Austronesian expansion could provide a unique opportunity to shed light on the migration history of Austronesian-speaking people. However, previous studies based on haploid genomes could not study admixture at the individual level. Studies of multiple loci of the nuclear genome are more powerful [88] in studying admixture at the individual level, but the sparse low-density loci examined in previous genomewide studies do not allow estimation of the admixture time, which relies on recombination information extracted from high-density genomewide data.
We analyzed dense genomewide SNP data from 2 studies [68, 89]. The first consists of about 50,000 SNPs analyzed in 288 individuals from 13 Austronesian-speaking populations and 2 Papuan-speaking populations across Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, while the second consists of about 680,000 SNPs analyzed in 36 individuals from 7 populations from Indonesia and 25 individuals from New Guinea. Apart from a general description of population structure and its relationship with geography, language, and demographic history, we focus on estimating the amount and time of admixture involving Asian and Papuan ancestry across E. Indonesia to test the various scenarios that might explain the admixture history. Because genetic recombination breaks down parental genomes into segments of different sizes, the genome of a descendant of an admixture event is composed of different combinations of these ancestral segments, or 'blocks' [90]. Admixture time can be estimated from the information based on distribution of ancestral segments and the recombination breakpoints in an admixed genome [34, 57, 63, 66, 90]. In this study, we assume that a cline of admixture times that decreases from west to east across E. Indonesia would support a scenario of incoming Asians admixing with indigenous Papuan groups, while a cline in the opposite direction would indicate incoming Papuans admixing with resident Asians. Moreover, the actual admixture times would indicate when the migration occurred. Our approach is thus to estimate population admixture time by taking advantage of available genomewide data of both E. Indonesian populations showing admixture and their ancestry reference populations.
In summary, the admixture time analysis of 2 different datasets provides compelling evidence that people of Asian ancestry began moving through E. Indonesia about 4,000 years ago, from west to east, and admixed with resident groups of Papuan ancestry. Furthermore, this scenario is in excellent agreement with linguistic and archeological evidence for a pre-Austronesian presence of Papuans in E. Indonesia [91, 92] and for an eastward spread of Austronesian-speaking farmers across E. Indonesia [82, 83]. Our analyses thus refute suggestions that the Asian ancestry observed in Indonesia largely predates the Austronesian expansion [93, 94]. Instead, our analyses of genomewide data indicate that there was a strong and significant genetic impact associated with the Austronesian expansion in Indonesia, just as similar analyses have pointed to a strong and significant genetic impact associated with the Austronesian expansion through Near and Remote Oceania [87, 95, 96]. Given that admixture among human populations (and between modern and archaic humans) is increasingly being recognized as a significant aspect of modern human biology [97], estimates of the time of admixture should provide important new insights into the history of our species.