Scientists have tried to understand biology through DNA sequence information, since the DNA is verified as the unit of genetic heredity. Also, scientists hope to dramatically reduce the cost of reading genomic DNA and to obtain the high-throughput DNA sequence information. Since the automated DNA sequencers were developed with fluorescent dyes of different colors, laser, and computer technology in the 1980s, the human genome project (HGP) was begun in 1990, and the human genome was completely released in 2003, while further analysis is still being published. A total of about 3 billion dollars was invested to the project. In 1991, the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) funds were geared toward lowering the cost of DNA sequencing. Some of technologies invested improved the DNA sequencing. To date, the Applied Biosystems, Roche/454, and Illumina/Solexa have successfully developed their technology and applied DNA sequencing in the world during the recent 6 years. Most of the newest technologies currently in use generate sequences from 36 to 1,000 base pairs, which requires special software for different applications, including whole-genome sequencing, transcriptome analysis, and regulatory gene analysis. In particular, in silico method development using bioinformation software for next-generation sequence assembly would be alert for many genome projects and more applications in genome biology. Particularly, many biologists and geneticists using massive DNA and RNA sequences have used the sequencing applications focused on the variable research fields in medicine, such as improved diagnosis of disease; gene therapy; control systems for drugs, including pharmacogenomics "custom drugs;" evolution; bioenergy and environmental applications of creative energy sources (biofuels); clean up of toxic wastes, including efficient environmental sources against carbon; and agriculture projects, including livestock of healthier, more productive, disease-resistant farm animals and breeding of disease-, insect-, and drought-resistant crops. In this paper, we report several ways of genome sequencing and expression profiling in genome biology.