The meta-analysis is a tool for pooling information from multiple independent studies [1234]. In the field of genetics, the meta-analysis has become a popular way of aggregating information from multiple genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in order to increase statistical power while controlling for the rate of false positive findings [5678910111213]. The meta-analysis has also become a useful tool for many applications of bioinformatics, such as neuroimage processing [14] and expression quantitative trait loci analysis [15].
There exist several approaches for combining information from multiple studies. Statistical methods can differ depending on the scenario: when (1) test statistics are unknown but only p-values are available, (2) test statistics are known but data are not available, or (3) actual data are available. In this paper, we focus on scenario (2), which is a common situation in genetic studies. We note that for scenario (1), Fisher's method for combining p-values is commonly used [16]. In scenario (3), we can combine actual data, which is rarely doable in retrospective studies or in genetic studies where transferring genotype data is difficult due to privacy issues. For scenario (2), which we focus on, the fixed effects model meta-analysis is the most common approach for synthesizing test statistics from multiple studies [117].
To perform a fixed effects model meta-analysis, there are two popular methods: the inverse variance-weighted average and the weighted sum of z-scores (SZ) [21718]. The inverse variance-weighted average method (IVW) summarizes effect sizes from multiple independent studies by calculating the weighted mean of the effect sizes using the inverse variance of the individual studies as weights. The weighted SZ method constructs a new z-score by calculating a weighted sum of individual z-scores. It has been known that the sample size of individual studies is a preferable weight for the method [101920]. Although several empirical evidence has shown that the two methods perform similarly [21721], the characteristics of each method and the analytical connection between the two methods have not been thoroughly investigated.
In this paper, we first investigate the optimal characteristics of the two methods. We show that the two methods are optimized for different optimality criteria: IVW maximizes the likelihood function, which is equivalent to minimizing the estimator variance, and SZ maximizes the non-centrality parameter of the statistic, which is equivalent to maximizing the statistical power. This characterization gives us insight into the optimal weight for SZ; using only the sample size information as weights can often be suboptimal in terms of statistical power compared with using all information as weights, such as minor allele frequencies. Although the two methods are optimized for different goals, we analytically demonstrate that the two methods become equivalent under certain assumptions that hold over a wide range of applications. We examine this connection between the two methods both analytically and empirically. Finally, using real data analysis utilizing the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium data, we demonstrate that the two methods can give distinct results in certain study designs.