The development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) has brought remarkable growth in our understanding of human genome variants through comprehensive characterization. On top of that, various efforts have been made to find associations of these understandings with diseases, including cancers [1].
Particularly, detecting various mutations, including somatic mutations, is essential to comprehend the cancer genome [2]. However, this is one of the most challenging parts in studying cancer, because somatic mutations are sporadic among healthy cells [3], and therefore, variants with low allelic fractions are hard to track down [4]. Fortunately, targeted sequencing has been a great support to overcome these difficulties. Compared to whole-genome sequencing, targeted sequencing has several advantages in many aspects: high coverage data could be generated at a more reasonable price [5]; low-frequency variants could be detected with this ultra-deep sequencing [6]; and different types of mutations, such as single-nucleotide variants, short indels (insertion and deletions), structure variations, and copy number alterations, can be examined via targeted sequencing [7]. Therefore, many laboratories in both academia and the medical industry are making efforts to develop their own gene panels with various sizes.
However, the next predicament is the analysis of the targeted sequencing data, since the variants revealed in the data are hard to discriminate from false-positive errors. In detail, innate sequencing errors and early cycle polymerase chain reaction (PCR) biases during library amplification or target enrichment could be considered super or rare mutations during the variant calling process. To overcome this erroneous algorithm, unique molecular index (UMI) technology was recently developed [8]. UMIs, as 8–9-bp random oligonucleotides, barcode a single DNA molecule and index replicates generated from the same DNA templates during PCR amplification. Several proof-of-concept studies have proven the error correction mechanism of the UMI [6, 9–13], and they revealed that PCR biases and sequencing errors were compensated during consensus sequence extraction from reads with the same UMI tags [6]. Nevertheless, analyzing data with UMI is still a tedious task [8]. In other words, some UMI-analyzing and variant calling tools have limitations in their broad application to the data generated from different hybrid capture platforms or other types of sequencing data, such as single-cell sequencing. In addition, most files from each tool are not compatible with the tools in different pipelines. For example, a recently developed analysis tool, named smCounter2, is a variant caller and an analysis pipeline tool package for targeted sequencing data with UMIs. Purportedly, this tool is specialized to call low-frequency variants. However, the usage of smCounter2 is restricted only to the data generated by the QIAGEN QIAseq DNA target enrichment kit [6].
In this study, to build a versatile analysis pipeline to apply to various types of hybrid capture-based targeted sequencing, our laboratory evaluated various types of analysis tools, like Fulcrum genomics (fgbio, https://github.com/fulcrum-genomics/fgbio), Picard (http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard), and the Genome Analysis Tool Kit (GATK) [14]. We put our effort into optimizing the pipeline so as to not make discrepancies between the files and enable easier interpretation of the results. Furthermore, we show an example of how targeted sequencing experiments can be investigated for their quality from the analysis and how we could take points from the results analysis as feedback for the experiment.