Many types of human cancers and disorders/diseases are often induced by misregulation of gene expression. Mechasnims for this misregulation involve both genetic mutations (genetic instability) and epigenetic modifications that disrupt the function of genes, including tumor suppressor and oncogenes, as well as other genes related to cancer, via altered activity or expression of the products of the genes. Given the importance of epigenetic dysregulation in tumor initiation and development, differentiating causative "drivers" (causes) and resulting "passengers" (outcomes) is becoming an important priority for cancer biology as well as epigenetics. Driver genes have to be essential for cancer causation, whereas passenger genes are not necessary [29]. By the development and improvement of technology, it may eventually be possible to accurately and minutely distinguish epigenetic aberrations of driver genes [30, 31]. Many current clinical investigations and trials of epigenetics-based cancer therapy, highlighting the reciprocal regulation of epigenetically modifying enzymes, miRNAs, and genetic defects in cancer, have come from scientific discoveries of how epigenetic aberrations in cancer manage to play a key role at every stage of tumorigenesis and have such a profound impact on the underlying mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Nevertheless, cooperation between epigenetics and genetics in tumorigenesis (Fig. 3) is the subject of debate. The interconnection between these two processes becomes increasingly apparent, in large part because it is realized that mutations of various epigenetic modifier genes are associated with human cancers [32]. The mutation of epigenetic modifiers presumably fosters profound epigenetic anomalies in terms of DNA methylation, histone modifications, miRNA, and nucleosome positioning and occupancy, which expedites global dysregulation of gene expression. Underlying this dysregulated epigenome is genomic instability, which generates mutations in epigenetic modifiers that induce abnormal gene expression, which may predispose one to cancer [32], although this remains to be demonstrated. Insight into its underlying mechanisms helps establish the epigenetic involvement in tumorigenesis. Because epigenetic processes involve a number of overlapping and interconnected mechanisms and pathways, it is difficult to definitely identify the cellular and molecular identities and the mechanism(s) underlying the epigenetic outcomes and phenotype. Based on studies of cell lines that have originated from tumor tissues and tissue samples collected from cancer patients, aberrant epigenetic marks can result in inappropriate expression of genes that are associated with cancer (tumor suppressors and/or oncogenes). It is now generally accepted that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities and that epigenetic alterations may be the key to tumor initiation and development [5, 6, 8]. The cancer epigenome is characterized by substantial changes in various epigenetic regulatory layers; herein, we introduce some important examples of epigenetic disruptions that cause mutations of key genes and/or alterations of signaling pathways in cancer development.
However, this idea has now been expanded to be a scientific norm by consolidating and incorporating the altered epigenetic regulatory mechanisms that are common and prevalent in cancer [5, 6]. Both genetics and epigenetics ultimately involve abnormal gene expression-i.e., phenotype. The expression level of a particular gene is determined by its context at the genetic level, which consists of several cis elements, including promoters, regulatory regions, enhancers, and insulators, each of which recruits specific transcriptional proteins for activation, repression, and constitutive or facultative transcription by various mechanisms. In other words, cis elements can act as a primary platform for recruiting epigenome-modifying enzymes and/or chromatin remodeling factors. The modified epigenome follows immediately and acts as a secondary platform for transcriptional effector machinery. Finally, transcription is turned on or off, and its level is determined by the overall epigenomic context.
The genetic road to cancer is relatively straightforward: mutation of tumor suppressors and/or oncogenes causes either a loss or gain of function and abnormal expression-namely the very relationship between altered genotypealtered phenotype. On the contrary, there are no genetic changes but a sick phenotype in the epigenetic road to cancer. The epigenetic pathway to cancer is much more complicated and roundabout and is determined by integrating numerous epigenetic variations, including DNA methylation, histone variants and modifications, and nucleosome remodeling, as well as small non-coding regulatory RNAs (Fig. 2) [8]. During tumor initiation and progression, the epigenome undergoes multiple alterations, including a genome-wide loss of DNA methylation (hypomethylation), frequent increases in promoter methylation of CpG islands, and aberrant changes in nucleosome occupancy and histone modification profile, and these epigenetic aberrations drive tumor cell heterogeneity, as well as tumorigenesis.
Epigenetic aberration is a major feature of cancer, but its etiological role in tumor development remains controversial. This contrasts with genomic instability, which is known to produce cancer-causing mutations. Recent evidence demonstrates that a dysregulated epigenome can promote tumorigenesis via altered gene expression; however, the question of whether a dysregulated epigenome can predispose one to DNA damage and generate genomic instability remains clearly unaddressed. Only few possible mechanisms have been proposed; one possible mechanism by which chromosome segregation errors promote tumorigenesis is by inhibiting chromosome condensation for mitotic entry or destabilizing heterochromatin at centromeres, which facilitates chromosomal misalignment and accelerates the formation of unattached chromosomes or malfunctioning spindles. A second mechanism is chromosomal breakage and non-homologous end-joining, which result in chromosomal rearrangement and extensive structural alterations in chromosomes. Third, a dysregulated epigenome at telomeres promotes its elongation or chromosomal rearrangement. Intriguingly, histone deacetylase inhibitors or knockdown/knockout of epigenome modifiers can induce DNA damage, but whether this DNA damage can indeed predispose one to cancer remains unestablished.