Generally, in silico methods are a computational way to perform knowledge inference by using data mining, with less time-consumption and including machine learning, molecular docking, pharmacophore structure, structure-activity relationships (SAR), quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), and combination methods. Drug-knowledge discovery with in silico methods mainly identified core molecular entities, including genes, proteins, therapeutic compounds, and other “omics” information and henceforth, to explore the novel link between them [4]. Though chemoinformatics methods, such as SAR or QSAR, have made great success in screening chemical libraries, the huge body of candidate chemical compounds has led to overload calculation and made these methods far from perfect [5]. Thanks to the rapid emergence of deep neural network since the early 2010s, deep learning strategies have undoubtedly manifested their computational advantage over chemoinformatics strategies for drug screening [6], and made it another application field of deep neural networks. In the meantime, chemoinformatics strategies mainly focused on novel drug-target identification or DDIs prediction, instead of drug-side effects or drug-disease pairs. With higher odds of success, knowledge discovery tasks of recent ones relied heavily on structured knowledge entires came from bioinformatics-based data base searching or natural language processing (NLP)–aided automatical curation.In this review, we mainly focus on two typical in silico methods of drug-related knowledge discovery. One method is text mining, i.e., Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP). Another one is a knowledge discovery method, with low rank approximation of drug data with a form of tensors or matrices. As structured knowledge entries were supportive to resolve most drug-related knowledge discovery tasks, NLP methods are regarded as a good addition to traditional in silico methods. In addition, the popularization of knowledge graphs, in recent years, has dramatically encouraged the promising application of knowledge inference in drug-related knowledge discovery. Tensors or matrices were treated as natural data structures, to contain drug knowledge entries, and tensor or matrix decomposition served as a rough approximation of novel link discovery.