Subcellular localization
Identification of subcellular location of the protein in a computer based functional analysis is significant because there is a strong relation between the function and location of the protein in cellular space [75, 76]. It also gives insight into the determination of probable drug target or vaccine target among the identified virulent proteins. For the newly assigned 104 HPs, we deduced their relative subcellular locations from the results of subcellular localization prediction discussed earlier on the basis of consensus-based approach. Relative subcellular locations of predicted HPs are given in Table 1. We also classified the predicted HPs based on their subcellular locations (Fig. 2). Associating the results of subcellular localization with those of virulence factors analysis may help in the identification of probable drug or vaccine targets.
In conclusion, computational sequence analysis of HPs in order to find out possible functional clues is an extensive work and need much patience for each gene is individually analyzed with an array of tools and databases. The inferences are drawn with a sensitive approach to discard the possibilities of false-positives. Due to the occurrence of similar looking patterns, prediction software may predict different function for similar HP than that predicted by another tool. Therefore, we have selected a more sensitive consensusbased approach, cross-checking the results of all used programs and then deducing inferences on the basis of majority rule. Majority rule is the criteria taking the function predicted by four or more tools as the probable function of the HP. This way, we have successfully predicted probable functions of 104 HPs with high level confidence. A wide range of HPs showing functional similarities with the proteins those play an essential role in bacterial pathogenesis. The study may pave the way for experimentalists to look forward to the possibilities of in vitro functional characterization of virulent proteins that may be considered potential therapeutic targets in the process of drug discovery.