The recent advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies has accelerated the realization of precision medicine, especially for cancer treatment [1]. With NGS tools, the mutation-based determination of an actionable drug is possible, and side effects of a drug can be minimized [2, 3]. Another technical revolution for precision medicine is the development of the patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model. The basic principle of the PDX model is to engraft human tumor tissues or cells onto immuno-deficient mice and expand the tumor tissues in the immuno-deficient mouse to test the efficacy of candidate anti-cancer drugs [4, 5]. Once a druggable mutation is identified by NGS, the PDX model that has been established from the same patient can provide an efficient way to validate the candidate target therapy. Even though an in vitro culture of the primary tumor cell can also be applicable for drug efficacy screening, the PDX mouse model has advantages compared with in vitro tissue cultures. For example, under artificial in vitro culture conditions, cancer cells may acquire further genomic alterations and phenotypic changes to survive, whereas PDX models appear to have greater similarity to primary tumors [6, 7]. Indeed, according to Gu et al. [8], PDX-based mouse trials have shown similar results as cancer patient-based clinical trials.
According to Fichtner et al. [9], most of the key genetic alterations identified in primary tumors were consistently detected in the PDX models, and the PDX models had similar outcomes as chemotherapy. However, it is still unknown how many of the genetic alterations identified in primary tumors are consistently detected in tumor tissues in the PDX model that has been established from the same patient. Especially, the consistency of key genetic alterations between primary tumors and the PDX model is very important to test the efficacy of candidate anti-cancer drugs that have been designed, based on the mutation profiles in the primary tumor.
To address this issue, we analyzed the mutations of three primary colorectal cancers (CRCs) and matched xenograft tissues in PDX models by NGS-based cancer panel analysis. Then, we compared the mutational status between the primary tumors and PDX models.