NC, a parasitic disease caused by infection of the CNS with the TsM, poses formidable global public health problems and critically affects disability-adjusted life years. NC has become an emerging or a re-emerging disease in industrialized countries due to an increasing frequency of immigration from endemic areas. The disease is now regarded as one of the most important emerging diseases, together with other viral- and drug-resistant bacterial infections [42].
NC caused public health concerns in Korea over the past several decades. However, dramatic improvements in control and management took place during the mid-1980s. The introduction of CT and MRI greatly increased the diagnostic accuracy, and the development of serodiagnostics provided supportive or confirmatory evidence for NC. Several investigations have shown that the detection of LMWPs of the 150 kDa and 120 kDa subunits in either serum or CSF is a good target for the diagnosis of active-stage NC. Recent progress in NC serodiagnosis has resulted in two different types of antigenic platforms. One is a chimeric protein fused with defined molecules with different epitope specificities [17], and the other is a multi-antigen print immunoassay that uses different antigens as a cocktail [17,43]. Both of these regimens exhibited reliable diagnostic feasibility, especially for the diagnosis of active-stage NC. Diagnosing active NC is important because it allows treatment with specific chemotherapeutics, while chronic-stage or acephalic budding cysticercosis in the ventricles is not subject to anthelminthics, but requires surgical or symptomatic treatment to control intractable seizures.
All these efforts have made NC controllable and manageable. However, further study is required to find solutions for the control of late-onset intractable seizures, especially after medical treatment, and for the serological diagnosis of NC patients infected with few worms. Such further advances would enhance the detection, management, and prevention of NC. The identification and combing of other novel antigenic molecules that bear different epitope specificity will further contribute to the design of final platform regimen(s).