In this work we present some of the techniques that are most commonly used for microbiome analysis. We place a particular emphasis on those methods that preserve the principles of compositional data analysis.
Classical methods that ignore the compositional nature of microbiome data can result in spurious correlations and sub-compositional incoherencies. This is especially relevant for classical univariate test where the strong dependencies between microbial abundances results in an important increase of type I error. Simulation studies show that the false discovery rate increases as the true-positive fold change increases and that it can achieve unacceptable extremely large values [17,33]. Moreover, from a biological point of view univariate approaches are questionable because they ignore that the microbiome is an ecosystem with complex interactions between its members and with the environment.
There is an increasing awareness of the need of using proper CoDA methods for microbiome analysis [10,38]. In this work we make clear that proper CoDA methods are available for all steps of a microbiome statistical analysis: normalization, diversity analysis, ordination and differential abundance testing, both, multivariate and univariate.
Normalization is not required and only zero imputation is needed. Diversity analysis and ordination can be performed after clr or ilr transformations, for instance, Aitchison distance and PCA. CoDA adapted Kernel machine regression can be used for multivariate differential abundance testing. Univariate approaches are not recommended. Penalized multivariate regression, such as sPLS-DA, is an alternative for the identification of the taxa that are most associated with the outcome. The algorithm selbal for the selection of microbial signatures is also an alternative to univariate selection of taxa when the main interest is prediction.
Even so, more research is still needed to fully understand the performance and limitations of the current available CoDA methods for microbiome analysis that will probably lead to their improvement or to the proposal of new approaches.