DNA methylation and expression profiling
The samples for DNA methylation and gene expression profiling experiments were prepared as follows. Blood from each individual was collected into two EDTA tubes (3 mL). After the contents had been sufficiently mixed for 5 min, the tubes were stored in a refrigerator. The genomic DNA and total RNA were extracted using DNeasy and RNeasy Blood and Tissue Kits (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Bisulfite conversion of genomic DNA was carried out using an EZ DNA methylation kit from Zymo Research (Irvine, CA, USA), and DNA methylation profiles were generated using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Background correction and dye bias equalization were conducted using methylumi and lumi packages in R, respectively. Then, the data was normalized using the beta mixture quantile method [10]. The methylation levels of individual CpG sites were estimated as beta-values, which are the ratio of intensities between locus-specific methylated and unmethylated bead-bound probes. For statistical analysis, the DNA methylation level at each CpG site was converted to an M-value using the logit transformation as recommended by Du et al. [11] and Marabita et al. [12]. The probes annotated as NCBI's reference SNP ID (rs ID) numbers were removed, then the methylation status of a total of 485,512 CpG sites were used for the analysis.
Genome-wide gene expression levels were measured using an Illumina Human HT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip Kit, with 47,318 probes. The extraction of raw data and the subsequent preprocessing were performed using the Illumina GenomeStudio software according to the manufacturer's instructions. The obtained expression profiles were then quantile normalized using the R preprocessCore package. The DNA methylation and DNA expression profile datasets were submitted to ArrayExpress (accession numbers E-MTAB-3757 and E-MTAB-3753, respectively). DNA and RNA from 12 subjects were loaded onto a single 12-well chip for methylation and gene expression analyses, respectively, so that batch effect adjustment did not need to be considered.