Extranodal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (NKTCL) is a malignant neoplasm characterized by a cytotoxic phenotype and is associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. It is rare in Western countries but is the most common subtype of mature T and NK cell neoplasms in Asia [1]. Although it has been suggested that EBV could play a pathogenic role in the development of NKTCL, its etiology and molecular pathogenesis have remained unexplained.
The clinical course of NKTCL is usually highly aggressive, but its survival rate has improved with the recent progress in intensive therapies, including combined chemoradiotherapy and autologous bone marrow transplantation [23]. However, the prognosis of NKTCL is variable, and the recurrence rate is still high. Thus, there is a great need to define a molecular pathway associated with the pathogenesis, prognosis, or drug resistance of NKTCL.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has made genetic and molecular studies effective, with more reliable results achieved [4]. High-throughput sequencing technology can conduct millions of sequencing reactions in parallel. Unlike in Sanger sequencing, NGS enables the detection of novel genetic alterations, since the sequence of every base in the region of interest is detected, and a large number of loci of interest (multiple genes) can be analyzed in a single panel. It is currently used in a wide variety of research fields. For example, it has been used to identify mutations or to profile gene expressions in cancer research and has been utilized in population genomic studies, including the 1000 Genomes Project.
Recent advancements in NGS technology have revolutionized clinical research. Moreover, the emergence of bench-top sequencers, such as the Ion Proton platform, has allowed genomic and molecular studies to be done easily and effectively by individual researchers and institutes. Nowadays, many molecular studies on the cancer genome are being performed using NGS. The detection of mutations or gene expression in mixed samples requires high sequencing depth, which is not achieved by whole-genome "shotgun" approaches. Targeted sequencing is able to yield a desirable sequencing depth for this purpose. Thus, it is more efficient to identify mutations correlating with tumor phenotype and in developing possible targeted drug therapies. Yet, molecular studies using NGS in NKTCL have languished compared with B-cell lymphoma cases [56789]. Therefore, this study aims to identify mutations possibly responsible for NKTCL using targeted sequencing with a comprehensive panel of 409 cancer-related genes (Supplementary Fig. 1) and to suggest candidate genes that can be used as potential bio-markers of NKTCL in the future.