To build the basis for comparison and understand transposition mechanisms, it is necessary to consider TE structures based on the presence or absence of the following factors: 1) RNA intermediates before transposition, 2) TIRs or LTRs, 3) transposase or reverse transcriptase (RT) and other proteins related to autonomous or non-autonomous transposition, 4) TSD, and 5) other features, like DNA replication modes, hairpin structure, and enhancers.
Transposition of dTEs involves direct movement of the dTE intermediate either by a simple cut-and-paste mechanism, as in Tn5 [13], Tn7 [14], and Tn10 [15], or by replicative transposition, in which case one copy stays in the original site and a daughter dTE copy appears in a distant location [16, 17, 18]. Step-wise description of the transposition events includes the requirement and pairing of both dTE ends [13, 19], binding of the transposase proteins to the terminal sequences, double-strand breaks (DSBs) of the dTE terminals [14] and target ends, ligation of the 3'-OH donor end and the 5'-P target end, and gap repair of the single-strand gaps on the target that were generated by DSB [20]. In the case of the Mu bacteriophage, the gap can be repaired while the entire transposon gets replicated in a cointegrate mechanism [21, 22].
Transposition of rTEs involves an RNA intermediate that is reverse-transcribed by RT into a cDNA. This double-stranded linear DNA functions as the direct precursor for integration by an integrase protein into a new location in the host chromosome in a 'copy and paste' manner, as in the 'cut-and-paste' transposition reaction in dTEs [20, 23].
TIRs are a hallmark of dTEs, as LTRs have been that of rTEs until they were joined by non-LTR retrotransposons, which have a 5'-untranslated region (5' UTR) and 3' UTR, as typified by LINE-1 (L1), or which has neither of the terminal elements, as typified by the Alu element. It becomes clear that the presence of terminal repeats in the TEs is no longer a common requirement for the transposition reaction.
The description of the protein factors above will suffice for this review, except for the long interspersed nuclear element (LINE) open reading frames (ORFs). The retrotransposition and integration of LINE have been viewed as a coupled process, called target-primed reverse-transcription [5, 24]. However, this model has recently been enhanced by the finding that L1 reverse-transcription does not require base pairing between the primer and template [25]. Both the RT and endonuclease domains in L1 are encoded by the same ORF. Therefore, the cDNA that was reverse-transcribed from the mRNA expressed from the genomic copy of LINE is inserted into the host genome [9].
TSDs are generated in almost all classes and families of TEs, except for the Helitron dTE superfamily [6, 9, 10]. The size of the TSD varies from 2 to 11, but the sequences are not conserved. The size is unique to superfamilies and can be used as a diagnostic feature. The ubiquitous presence of TSDs, which are generated by gap fillings (GFs) after TE integration on the target [26], reflects the unity in transposition reactions, regardless of dTE or rTE, and the presence or absence of terminal repeats [22]. Yet, the meaning of the small oligomer size of the duplicated target is seldom discussed in terms of DNA structure. This aspect will be dealt with below with the FBI DNA mechanism.
Helitron, a eukaryotic dTE, is considered, together with Polintons, a third class of TEs for many unique aspects [9]. Helitron does not have TIRs but has 5'-TC and CCTR-3' termini instead. They contain 16-20-bp hairpins 10-12 nucleotides inside of the 3'-end and transpose precisely between the 5'-A and T-3' with no TSD generation. It is known to adopt replicative rolling circle transposition [27]. Helitrons indiscriminately capture and mobilize gene sequences and may impact hybrid vigor or heterosis in maize [28]. The hairpin is presumed to serve as the terminator of rolling circle replication [9]. Since the hairpin sequence corresponds to the FBI DNA motif, it will be interesting to consider whether it can not only serve as a terminator or rolling circle replication but also serve as a replication origin for its own replication and for frequent gene capture activities, which the Helitron is capable of.
Polinton was discovered and characterized based on bioinformatics studies [27]. Polinton is 15-20 kb long, with a 6-bp TSD and 100-1,000-bp TIR at both ends. Polintons code up to 10 proteins, including a family of B DNA polymerases (POLBs), a retroviral-like integrase, an A transposase, and an adenoviral-like cysteine protease. Polintons, however, with their structural characteristics and presence of TSD, should follow non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) with the GF transposition mechanism, as ordinary dTEs. What makes it unique is the presence of a self-encoded POLB and a short 1-3-bp terminal tandem repeat that supports a protein-primed self-synthesis mechanism for Polinton propagation. This mechanism calls for an extrachromosomal single-stranded Polinton intermediate that forms a racketlike structure and follows POLB-mediated replication to become double-stranded before being integrated into the host genome [9].
It has been proposed that eukaryotic dTEs follow three types of transposition mechanisms according to different replication modes: cut-and-paste for most dTEs, rolling circle replication for Helitrons, and synthetic replication for Polintons [9]. In fact, there seems to be many different cases of transposon-related replication that need to be clarified in the future. As mentioned earlier, continuation of DNA replication of an inserted TE molecule, like in Mu co-integration, may also fill the gap to generate TSDs. It should be emphasized that DNA transposition has been grouped in two: simple, conservative, or 'cut-and-paste' mechanism and replicative transposition [16, 17, 29]. In Tn5, at the outer ends, ori-C-like 9-bp sequences are found, which may serve to direct host replication functions to the ends of the element during transposition [17]. Transposition of Tn5 may involve replication proceeding from both ends in a symmetrical manner. This type of mechanism may differ from the polarized replication of other elements [17]. A synthetic mechanism is proposed for Polinton propagation to explain protein-primed replication of a racket-like structure of a single-stranded Polinton [9]. If it gets to be understood that the heteroduplex structure that is derived from FBI DNA may serve as the template of DNA replication, many of the diverse cases of DNA replication may be clarified (see below).