Good days are ending, however. Today, the initial enthusiasm for GWASs is decreasing, and the GWAS society is facing severe criticisms. A frequent complaint is that GWAS results mean little to patients due to the small effect of variants on disease risk and their relatively small contribution to common disease etiology. This claim might be partially correct. In the first place, "significantly associated" does not mean that the association identified by the study is significant in biology, medicine, or actual life. For example, a paper reported the identification of a SNP that is associated with height, but its estimated additive effect is only 0.44 cm on height [19]. Another example of dubious significance is a GWAS study claiming that cartilage thickness of the hip joint measured on X-ray films is decreased in subjects with a susceptibility allele; they have a 0.07-mm (not cm!) narrower joint space than those who do not have the allele [20].
However, the low risk (low odds ratio) is not always due to the GWAS itself. In many studies, it is the problem of particular studies themselves, not of the GWAS. For examples, using pooled controls of general populations as controls of highly prevalent diseases, like diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and obesity, must decrease the odds ratio of the susceptibility alleles because of contamination of the patients in the controls. Also, ambiguous definition of populations, like "UK Caucasians" or "Western Europeans," would compromise the result by admixture of different ethnic subgroups. Thus, it is necessary to detect population stratification prior to association analysis.
Moreover, a GWAS is not a method to conclude something. It's a method to map the gene: an associated variant is not necessarily a true causal variant. GWASs present candidates of the causal variant. To identify and prove the causality, we need to find the best associated variations by fine mapping around the smoking gun GWAS signal, followed by functional studies for them. Statistics must lead to biology. Biology must lead to medicine. It is true that after all, no treatment, no benefit, to the patients has been given for common diseases from GWAS results so far. My comment is not intended to look down on GWASs. It is a method to start something; it gives us wonderful start points. You can start the work based on the reality of the disease-clinical evidence (patient, clinical record) from the human evidence in front of you-to the patients at your bedside.
Another problem is that not infrequently, the interpretation of the 'mapping' results is wrong. In many studies, authors just make a story for causality by relating to known genes near the marker SNPs, even if they are far apart on the genome. The association does not tell which gene is implicated; it just tells which sequence variation is wrong. Some of the readers might be thinking that all genes have already been discovered by the international genome project. This is totally wrong. There are still many more genes that have not been identified. For example, we have found a novel susceptibility gene, DVWA, that is associated with osteoarthritis [21]. DVWA was in a gene desert region when we first found it in 2004. While we were working on cloning it [21, 22], a computer-predicted gene was mapped to the region; however, the prediction was a mess. The number of coding exons was predicted to be 19, while it was actually 3. Only 1 in 7 experimentally determined exons of DVWA had been correctly predicted regarding the exon-intron boundary and coding region (Fig. 2). We also found a novel susceptibility gene for osteoporosis, FONG [23], which was not predicted correctly in the public database. GWASs can be a starting point to find a hidden gene in the genome, and we should remember that now, the concept of the "gene" itself is changing. We have already known that there are so many non-protein-coding genes: the genes encoding functional RNAs [24]. They are quite compatible to the original concept of the gene: information in the genome that determines phenotype or trait. To code proteins is just one of the many ways to determine phenotype.