Although tRNA metabolism is essential for all human cells, a number of neurological disorders are caused by defects in tRNA metabolism and tRNA processing enzymes. ANG mutants possessing reduced RNase activity were implicated in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease [54]. A subset of ALS-associated ANG mutants was also found in Parkinson's disease patients [55]. Administration of recombinant ANG to cultured neurons protects them from stress-induced apoptosis and promotes the lifespan and motor function of SOD1 (G93A) mice, a laboratory ALS model.
In neurons, excessive accumulation of some tRF-5 series members that are derived from a specific subset of tRNAs (Asp, Glu, Gly, His, Val, and Lys) triggers a sustained stress response leading to neuronal loss and links aberrant tRNA metabolism to the development of certain forms of intellectual disability [48].
tRFs derived from intron-containing tRNAs are also strongly implicated in neurodegeneration [565758]. A study on mutant mice carrying a catalytically inactive form of the RNA kinase CLP1, a component of the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex, revealed a neurological disorder characterized by progressive loss of lower spinal motor neurons. Surprisingly, mutant mice accumulate a novel class of tRFs. In addition, homozygous missense mutations in CLP1 (R140H) were found in patients with pontocerebellar hypoplasia, a heterogeneous group of inherited neurodegenerative disorders characterized by impaired development of various parts of the brain. These patients were identified to suffer from severe motor-sensory defects, cortical dysgenesis and microcephaly, and exhibit alterations in tRNA splicing [59]. On the cellular level, the R140A mutation leads to the depletion of mature tRNAs, the accumulation of unspliced pre-tRNAs in patient-derived induced neurons [58] and the accumulation of linear tRNA introns [57]. Transfection of 5'-unphosphorylated tRF corresponding to the 3'-exon of pre-tRNATyr (the natural substrate of CLP1) into patient cells results in reduced neuron survival under oxidative stress compared to the transfection of the 5'-exon, which had no effect on viability [58]. The kinase-dead CLP1 mice accumulate 5'-leader-exon-tRFs that sensitize cells to oxidative stress and promote cell death in a p53-dependent fashion [56]. While the exact mechanistic details on the interplay between CLP1 activity, tRNA splicing and functions of pre-tRNA-derived tRFs are yet to be uncovered, these studies provide a basis for further investigations linking aberrant tRNA metabolism and development of neurodegeneration [48].