Our analysis reveals that interoperability across platforms intended to facilitate the creation and use of resources and NLP applications for accessing and mining scientific publications is feasible, due to the many commonalities in the representation of linguistically annotated data that have been adopted by frameworks developed over the past decade.
Pairwise interoperability among the three platforms is sufficient to enable the use of specific features by making use of underspecification, limited manual configuration, and/or conventions (best practices). For example, the fact that PubAnnotation is schemaless allows LAPPS and INCEpTION to set up conventions to encode platform-specific metadata using the PubAnnotation model. An example of minimal manual configuration is the interoperability between INCEpTION and LAPPS where the user needs to specify the annotation type and feature carrying the predicted labels. To meet the user’s needs, it is sufficient to access these labels, and full mapping of all annotations produced by the LAPPS Grid is not required. Additionally, we have identified several places where, by including more metadata, interoperability among the three platforms can be further improved. For example, PubAnnotation could provide support for storing schema information, thereby removing the need for INCEpTION and the LAPPS Grid to use their own conventions, and thus facilitating conversion of annotations between the platforms.
At the same time, we have identified several area(s) where obstacles to interoperability among the three platforms remain, which are attributable to two major sources:
(1) Differences in the “overall organization” of annotations (as opposed to the structure of the annotation content itself), i.e., the PubAnnotation organization of annotation sets in projects, the LIF organization into views with accompanying metadata, and the INCEpTION organization as a UIMA hierarchy of objects.
(2) Difficulty of mapping annotation names that do not necessarily have a corresponding object or feature in the other scheme(s).
We have suggested a number of ways to address the first issue, primarily by finding ways to retain information specific to one representation in the others so that it can be restored after a round trip between platforms. However, this is only required when the platforms exchanging annotations use the same data–for example, one platform might use annotation identifiers while the other does not. Additional work will be necessary to identify to which extent this is critical in real-world use-cases and how to address it.
The second issue concerns semantic interoperability, which is a pervasive problem for harmonizing linguistic annotations, and one for which no obvious universal solution exists at this time. It is interesting to not that the set of basic annotation objects that are commonly produced and consumed by NLP modules (token, sentence, named entity, dependency, etc.) is consistent among the three platforms, even though there are differences in naming conventions; annotation names can therefore be automatically converted if the correspondences can be pre-determined for these objects. However, a problem arises when names are arbitrary (as in PubAnnotation, where no naming conventions are specified) or where users can add arbitrary names to the provided inventory (as allowed in both LIF and INCEpTION) and no mapping can be pre-determined (Note that it is possible to represent annotations from the other platforms in LIF, regardless of naming conventions; however, many tools in the LAPPS Grid will fail if the WSEV names are not used.). Nonetheless, the overlap in basic annotation names and the structural correspondence of associated information as generic feature-value pairs enables conversion at both the syntactic and semantic levels for a good portion of the kinds of annotations likely to be ported from platform to platform.
We also observe that it is presently not possible to build true cross-platform human-in-the-loop processes. INCEpTION proposes a REST-like protocol to communicate with re-trainable external recommenders. However, NLP services providers (the LAPPS Grid as well as other NLP service providers) do not presently support the re-training of models or the use of custom models in conjunction with their services. Thus, these aspects need to be explicitly considered by future work on NLP service platforms in order to enable human-in-the-loop scenarios.
The bottom line here is that it should ultimately be possible to use the three platforms together to provide a “meta-platform” that can accommodate sophisticated creation, validation, and sharing of annotations over biomedical publications. For example, documents can be retrieved from PubMed Central via PubAnnotation, automatically annotated using LAPPS Grid services and/or manually annotated/corrected using INCEpTION, and subsequently sent back for publication in PubAnnotation’s repository; additionally, INCEpTION can use LAPPS Grid services to generate automatically-generated annotation suggestions, thus facilitating the manual annotation process. The synergy among the three platforms may eventually enable exploiting the strengths of each, which would obviate the need to start from scratch to create a single, monolithic application that can provide their combined functionalities.