Human diseases involve complex processes, including the interaction between multiple biological layers, including genetic, epigenetic, and transcriptional regulation [1]. For identifying genes involved in complex human diseases, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are used by searching for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that occur more frequently in people without the disease. Prior GWASs identified SNPs related to several complex diseases, such as diabetes, heart abnormalities, and Parkinson disease. Researchers hope to find more SNPs associated with chronic diseases through GWASs in the future [2]. Most research has focused solely on the investigation of a single type of genomic data [3].
However, recent advances in genotyping technology have resulted in the large-scale generation of genomic data, and the variety of information collected has also become very diverse. Therefore, it has become very important to apply analytical methods that can fully utilize the given information. These data need to be analyzed in conjunction with disease variables, such as multiple SNPs and phenotypes. However, since these variables have different properties from each other, multi-block analysis that considers each property is necessary. Furthermore, even though these data have the potential to reveal great insights into the mechanism of disease and to discover novel biomarkers, statistical methods for integrative analysis of multi-block data are only emerging [4].
If there are only two variable blocks, canonical correlation analysis (CCA) can be applied. Research continues to try to analyze DNA-related data based on canonical analysis. Briki and Genest [5] adopted a canonical analysis approach to investigate correlated motions of atoms by molecular dynamics simulation. However, since there are more than two blocks in reality, the extended CCA methods that are applicable to more than two blocks have been less studied.
Hence, research has recently started to shift toward approaches using systematical models in order to integrate and analyze heterogeneous data comprehensively rather than through simple step-wise processes. Among multi-block analysis methods, generalized canonical correlation analysis (GCCA) is one of the most representative methods. Nevertheless, many studies have not yet been conducted on the application of multi-block methods to genomic data. Therefore, in the present study, we adopt GCCA to figure out the associations between SNP block, phenotype block, and disease block. We applied Korean Association Resource (KARE) data and analyzed the possibility and limitations of multi-block analysis methods for genomic data.