The human genome encodes hundreds of tRNA genes and pseudogenes. In the past two decades, an increasing number of reports have revealed abundant expression of functional tRFs; thus, it now appears highly plausible that cells use tRNAs as a source for functional sncRNAs to modulate biological processes beyond its translation function. It is imperative to discriminate functional tRNA fragments from "meaningless" degradation products, and to biochemically elucidate the factors in their biogenesis as well as to determine their molecular functions. Although tRFs, at least the tRF-5s induced by RSV, regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional stages in the cytoplasm, the precise mechanism is yet to be clarified. Like miRNAs, tRFs can repress target mRNAs by inhibiting their translation or facilitating their decay. These questions can be answered by analyzing their localization, identifying their interacting protein partners besides Argonaute proteins, and examining various biological phenomena in response to the changes in the expression of tRFs. Bioinformatics studies with the support from biochemical assays have identified numerous novel tRNA-interacting proteins [68], implying that the biological functions of tRNAs and their fragments may be way beyond our expectations. Further combination of computational and biochemical efforts will significantly advance our understanding of functional tRFs and expand our knowledge regarding the tRNA world.
The availability of genome sequencing data from patients with diverse conditions has already led to the identification of several mutations in tRNA genes and in genes involved in tRNA biogenesis [69]. The task now is to ascertain whether these mutations indeed affect the repertoire of tRFs and consequently the molecular pathology of the diseases. Studies on tRFs are still at a very early stage. Additional functions for tRFs are likely to be discovered continuously. Improved understanding of the functions of tRFs will provide valuable insights into human physiology and pathophysiology.
Recognition of tRFs as an important class of functional molecules has not happened until recently. The apparent presence of abundant tRFs in early studies with next generation sequencing data was often ignored. However, the combined biochemical evidence from many years of tRNA biology studies has brought the field to a previously unexpected conceptual consensus: specific tRFs are not simply random degradation products but functional molecules based on the following observations: (1) in many cases, tRFs do not derive from abundant cellular tRNAs, and the numbers of tRFs do not correlate with the parental tRNA gene copy numbers; (2) their fragmentation patterns are tRNA structure-dependent; (3) the fragmentation patterns is determined by the developmental stage or cell conditions; and (4) it is reported that some tRFs are bound to Argonaute/Piwi proteins, well-known components of the RNA-induced silencing complex [213170717273]. The expression of tRFs does not usually affect mature tRNA pools. Instead, it is involved in normal biological processes beyond translation and in diseases; thus, studies of tRFs have provided new insights into tRNA biology.