Many lines of archaeological evidence indicate that humans and Neanderthals may have coexisted in certain geographic locations. This gives rise to the most debatable question regarding the recent history of humans: did modern humans and Neanderthals interbreed? If they did, was it to an extent where meaningful exchange of genetic information may have occurred? Do we still carry any genetic elements of Neanderthals? Comparing the genome sequences is probably the best way to answer all these questions. All other features, including the level of intelligence in Neanderthals, have been speculated from bones, settlements, or artifacts found, and there is no way to be certain about the practicality or validity of the inferences made from these remains. The hypothesis that Neanderthals were able to practice complex behavior has already been disputed [28-30]. There has also been a significant amount of debate about the admixture of humans and Neanderthals. Morphological analyses have provided strong arguments both for and against the genetic exchange between these two species [31, 32], as have the comparative analyses of DNA sequences of these species [33-35]. The genome sequence itself can not validate many of these inferences, either, but it can answer the question of admixture and articulate the genetic elements that are unique to Neanderthals or to humans or those that are shared by both. Studies on the expression or protein functions in association with these unique elements, despite being plausible only for those found in the human genome, can eventually facilitate analysis of complex biological phenomena, such as reasoning, language, or other qualitative or behavioral traits, at the molecular level.In the past, a candidate gene approach has been successfully implemented to identify the presence or variance of certain genes that were believed to be modern human-specific. Using this approach, a number of speculations about Neanderthals could be made, including their skin and hair color. It was also discovered that Neanderthals had the same FOXP2 gene as modern humans, which was previously linked to language ability [36]. This approach of fishing for particular genes proved efficient, but there is a lot more than known genes in the whole genome that may play a critical regulatory role in gene expression and thus development. For instance, almost half of the human genome consists of transposable elements; these elements can affect gene expression by activating or deactivation functional genetic elements and by altering the protein coding by creating alternative splicing or creating new chimeric genes ([37-39], reviewed in [40, 41]). Transposable elements are also polymorphic among different populations of modern humans, and their association with phenotypic traits, including diseases, has been extensively studied, albeit with a lot more to be learned [42-44]. The whole-genome sequence is necessary for identifying transposable element insertions that may have taken place only in modern humans and subsequently assessing their functional impact.