Cirsium japonicum is a wild perennial herb found in many areas of Korea, Japan, and China. C. japonicum is used as an anti-haemorrhagic, anti-hypertensive and uretic agent in traditional Chinese medicine [1]. In traditional medicine, C. japonicum is sometimes used for the management of different types of cancer, including liver and uterine cancer and leukaemia [2]. To date, many studies have explored the effects of C. japonicum on various diseases. However, no reports have performed molecular biology studies or investigated comprehensive genomic and transcriptomic data in C. japonicum.
In Europe, silymarin, which is synthesized in Silybum marianum, belongs to the same family as C. japonicum and is prescribed for the treatment of chronic liver disease and the prevention of recurrent hepatitis C in liver transplant recipients [3, 4]. Silymarin is the key component of S. marianum and includes flavonolignans (silibinin, isosilibinin, silychristin, isosilychristin, and silydianin) and a flavonoid (taxifolin). Studies suggest that silymarin exerts a protective effect on the liver in alcoholic-induced liver disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and carbon tetrachloride-induced oxidative liver [1, 5]. This major bioactivity has also been reported in C. japonicum DC, which has properties similar to those of S. marianum [6]. C. japonicum var. spinossimum is often compared to the basic species thistle (C. japonicum Fisch ex DC) [7]. Silymarin is synthesized through the phenylpropanoid pathway and transforms phenylalanine into 4-coumaroyl-CoA, which acts via both the flavonoid and monolignol pathways [8–10].
Significant progress has been achieved in the field of next generation sequencing, which is driven by genomic/transcriptomic-based inquiries in biology. High-quality sequences are generated in a high-throughput manner at a low cost and with little labour. The Illumina platform is a highly utilized platform employed for transcriptome analyses of various model and non-model organisms and medicinal plants due to its potential for a high sequence yield [11–13]. The RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) method is superior to whole genome sequencing because RNA-Seq only studies the transcribed regions and provides a comprehensive and integrated view of the transcriptome with the precise locations of the transcriptome boundaries [14]. RNA-Seq is currently a very popular method used to examine both coding and non-coding gene annotations. Remarkable progress has been achieved in the exploration of medicinal plants at the genomic and transcriptomic levels, and the ultimate goal is to identify genes that are involved in biologically active phytocompounds and related pathways [15–18].
In this study, we established transcript databases for C. japonicum var. spinossimum and provided additional genetic information for further genome-wide research and analyses. We also aimed to investigate the transcripts that contribute to the production of silymarin in this herb.