According to the chromosome constitution of crocodilians, it would appear that chromosome changes evolved in parallel with the crocodilian relationship. Alligatoridae, which appeared in the early Tertiary, are considered to be the most primitive group in extant crocodilians [1]. There are two major crocodilians in Alligatoridae (Alligator and Caiman + Melanosuchus + Paleosuchus) generally found in the New World (America). This agreed with karyological data, which showed different karyotypic features in both chromosome number and fundamental number. Two Alligator species (A. mississippiensis and A. sinensis) still have the same karyotype form (2n = 32), but the karyotype of Caiman, Melanosuchus, and Paleosuchus, a sister clade of Alligator contains a higher chromosome number (2n = 42): a lower number of bi-armed chromosomes and a higher number of uni-armed chromosomes. This suggests that multiple centric fission occurred at the split of Alligator and Caiman + Melanosuchus + Paleosuchus, around 50~70 MYA before the middle of the Eocene (Fig. 1). This is more likely than an alternative explanation of the presence of centric fusion, because the karyotype of most crocodilians also exhibits 2n = 32. Interestingly, the total chromosome numbers of Caiman, Melanosuchus, and Paleosuchus are the same, but Paleosuchus contains a lower number of bi-armed and a higher number of uni-armed chromosomes, resulting in different fundamental numbers (Fig. 1). This suggests that Caiman + Melanosuchus and Paleosuchus evolved independently through at least one pericentric inversion or centromere positioning event, leading to ordinal radiation in two different lineages.
Two Alligator species (A. mississippiensis and A. sinensis), which exhibit the same karyotype form of 2n = 32, spread over more than one biogeography. A. mississippiensis is restricted to the Southeastern United States, whereas A. sinensis is restricted to China. Both species shared a common ancestor around 20~60 MYA (Fig. 1) [116]. This suggested the possibility of a geographic isolation process that played an important role in their evolutionary history. An overland route (presumably through Beringia) is the shortest distance from North America to Asia. Alligator probably moved to Asia during the warmer climate of the early Tertiary [16], based on the limitation of temperature and salt water tolerance [626364]. On the contrary, A. sinensis is the most cold-adapted of all living crocodilians, surviving the winter in burrows [65]. It might have moved into China during dramatic temperature changes. However, there was no evidence to support this idea until alligator fossils were found in Alaska [1].
The ancestral karyotype of crocodile is still retained in Crocodylidae. The karyotype of G. gangaticus (2n = 32) which resided in South-Asia, is also highly similar to that of Alligator [1920]. However, the karyotype of T. schlegelii (2n = 32), distributed around South-East Asia, contains lower numbers of bi-armed chromosomes and higher numbers of uni-armed chromosomes, and the fundamental numbers of these two species are different. This suggests the presence of pericentric inversion or centromere positioning, which probably occurred in T. schlegelii after it diverged from G. gangaticus around 15~35 MYA in the late Tertiary. In Crocodylus and relative species (M. cataphractus and O. tetraspis) lineage, the karyotype of M. cataphractus showed a lower total chromosome number with higher bi-armed chromosomes than those of T. schlegelii, despite having the same fundamental number (58), suggesting that the increase of bi-armed chromosomes is the result of centric fusion among the ancestral types of acrocentric chromosomes (Fig. 1). By contrast, the karyotype of O. tetraspis showed a higher total chromosome number with higher uni-armed chromosomes, but lower bi-armed chromosomes than those of G. gangaticus, T. schlegelii, and M. cataphractus [1920]. This suggests that at least multiple centric fissions occurred after O. tetraspis diverged from G. gangaticus, T. schlegelii, and M. cataphractus around 14~37 MYA.
Karyotypes resembling (2n = 32) T. schlegelii are also found in Crocodylus. This suggests that both T. schlegelii and Crocodylus share the same karyotypic feature which is derived from G. gangaticus and Alligator as a common ancestor of Crocodylia. By contrast, Crocodylus, only one genus in crocodilians, shows variation of chromosome number and chromosome morphology, in spite of the same chromosome number. This suggests that karyotype evolution occurred in Crocodylus, and subsequently radiated karyotypic forms in different species, during the period of crocodilian extinction around 9~16 MYA in the middle of the Miocene (Fig. 1) [16]. It is likely that after climate optimum in mid-Miocene, speciation process of Crocodylus was conducted along with global cooling and glaciation until the end of Pliocene, whereas other crocodilians underwent massive extinction [64]. The role of chromosome changes with species diversity is also found in other species during the same period, such as New World rodent (Calomys) [66] or African rodent (Tatera) [67]. Interestingly, the chromosome structure of Crocodylus species is likely conserved within the genus. This agreed with the presence of hybridization in captivity, often found in Crocodylus species. It would appear that all species from the genus have the potential to hybridize and produce fertile offspring. Examples of such events have been reported in both sympatric [6869] and allopatric species [61]. C. siamensis with chromosome number 2n = 30 has also hybridized with C. porosus with chromosome number 2n = 34. Chavananikul et al. [70] found that interspecific breeding of C. siamensis and C. porosus produced F1 hybrids (2n = 32) and F2 offspring with 2n = 32. This suggested hybrid viability, despite different chromosome numbers in the parent generation. This probably results from genome features that are still similar and not diverse in a short period of time in Crocodylus. Thus, the study of hybrid viability, homologous recombination, and meiotic segregation mechanisms may be critical to understand their genome evolution. However, the relative stability of Crocodylus genomes contributes to the lack of postzygotic reproductive isolation mechanisms, which is a fascinating aspect of crocodilian evolutionary biology, and rejects the traditional biological species concept. Other evidence of high conservation in chromosome structure is satellite DNA (stDNA) at the centromeric region on crocodilian chromosomes. Two stDNAs (CSI-HindIII-S and CSI-HindIII-M) isolated from C. siamensis and localized to centromeric regions of all chromosomes, except for chromosome 2, were highly conserved throughout several crocodilian species (Crocodylus niloticus, T. schlegelii, G. gangeticus, A. mississippiensis, A. sinensis, Caiman crocodilus, and Caiman latirostris) [21]. This suggested that CSI-HindIII sequences were contained in the karyotype of a common ancestor of Crocodylia. However, the evolutionary history of Crocodylus species recently diversified during a period of crocodilian extinction. This tallied with the evidence of a centromeric stDNA (CSI-DraI), which was also isolated from C. siamensis and localized to chromosome 2, and four pairs of small-sized chromosomes, were recognized in the genus Crocodylus but not in other crocodilians (Lapbenjakul et al. unpublished data) [21]. This suggested that CSI-DraI differentiated as a very rapidly evolving molecule in the Crocodylus lineage when crocodilian extinction began, and the molecular structure of centromeric regions of Crocodylus evolved independently from other crocodilians.
Within the Crocodylus lineage, molecular sequence analyses suggested highly recent radiation in this crocodilian group (Fig. 1) [16]. The relationship of A + T content (%) and AT-skew of the mtDNA genome also agreed with this indication as a high correlation between A + T content and AT-skew in many Crocodylus species but low correlation in other crocodilians (Fig. 2), suggesting that the bias of base substitution that occurred in the Crocodylus lineage did not have time to eminently alter the base composition of mtDNA genome as in other crocodilian divergences [17]. Traditionally, Crocodylus was considered to have originated in Africa during the Cretaceous [71], and their current distribution has resulted from continental drift [72]. However, recent molecular data and fossil records in Asia suggested that the Indo-Pacific was the place of origin of Crocodylus species [16]. They then migrated to the land based on two hypotheses: (1) dispersion from Indo-Pacific to the New World, followed by dispersion to Africa; and (2) dispersion from the Indo-Pacific into Africa, followed by dispersion to the New World.