Fluoroquinolones (FQs) are one of the most extensively used antibiotics in human therapy and veterinary treatment [1]. These compounds are of exceptional interest because their clinical role has vastly expanded since the introduction of norfloxacin in the 1980s [2]. The antibacterial activity of FQs results from their inhibition of different kinds of enzymes, such as type II topoisomerase, DNA gyrase and DNA topoisomerase IV, which control DNA topology and are vital for chromosome replication and function [3]. Structural modifications to the key building block element of quinolone have led to an expanded antibacterial activity, optimal pharmacokinetics, and a better safety profile [4]. There are currently four generations of FQs and the first-generation drugs or the original quinolones were not fluorinated and included drugs like oxolinic acid and nalidixic acid. The next generation, which included fluorinated compounds exhibited enhanced antimicrobial activity against gram-negative bacteria and extended their activity to some gram-positive bacteria. These compounds are classified as second-generation FQs and include drugs such as ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, lomefloxacin and norfloxacin. An expanded activity against gram-positive bacteria, while retaining broad gram-negative coverage was exhibited by the third generation FQs, which included levofloxacin. Lastly, the fourth generation FQs, such as clinafloxacin, inhibited anaerobic bacteria, while retaining the gram-positive and gram-negative antibacterial activity [5, 6].
The four FQs in this study (ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, lomefloxacin, and norfloxacin) belong to the class of second-generation FQs. Ciprofloxacin is an antibiotic that is widely used for the treatment of bacterial infection [7]. This includes skin infections, bone and joint infections and urinary tract infections, among others [8]. Ciprofloxacin is on the World Health Organization’s (WHO) “List of Essential Medicines” [9]. Lomefloxacin is a difluorinated quinolone used to treat bacterial infections including respiratory and urinary tract infections, and skin, eye, throat infections [10]. Ofloxacin is useful for treating bacterial infections of eye, ear [11], prostatitis [12], and certain types of infectious diarrhea [13]. Norfloxacin is used to treat urinary tract infections, gonorrhea and bladder and gynecological infections [14].
In this work, our interest is to study the antibacterial activity of FQs by molecular docking assays. We studied the inhibiting activity of the selected compounds with an antibacterial target protein. Furthermore, pharmacological studies of the compounds were performed. DNA gyrase has extensively been investigated as a target to study the mechanism of action for antibacterial compounds. FQs arrest the gyrase reaction after DNA cleavage leading to the generation of double-strand breaks [15]. To understand the interactions of the selected compounds at the active protein receptor sites (topoisomerase II DNA gyrase enzymes), docking studies were performed. Molecular docking provides a rational new approach to study the antibacterial properties of drugs [16]. A pharmacological analysis was also done for the second generation FQs [17]. This analysis included the evaluation of the pharmacological properties based on Lipinski’s rule of five, drug-likeness, bioactivity, and the drug score [18]. Furthermore, in silico preclinical trials including absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) test, health effect probability, and maximum recommended daily dose (MRDD) were also predicted.