The Declaration, consisting of 6 sections and 25 articles, was adopted unanimously on November 11, 1997 and endorsed by the UN General Assembly on December 9, 1998. Its Guidelines for the implementation were also endorsed on November 16, 1999. The aims of the Declaration are to promote and develop ethical studies and the actions arising out of them on the consequences of scientific and technological progress in the fields of biology and genetics, within the framework of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. UNESCO recognizes that research on the human genome and the resulting applications open up vast prospects for progress in improving the health of individuals and of humankind as a whole. However, it emphasizes that such research should fully respect human dignity, freedom, and human rights, as well as the prohibition of all forms of discrimination based on genetic characteristics. The following information is the main content of the Declaration [5].
The Declaration covers the issues of human dignity, the human genome, research on the human genome, conditions for the exercise of scientific activity, solidarity, and international cooperation, etc.
Article 1 states that the human genome underlies the fundamental unity of all members of the human family, as well as the recognition of their inherent dignity and diversity. It even declares that the human genome is the heritage of humanity in a symbolic sense. Article 2 prohibits genetic discrimination and states that human dignity makes it imperative not to reduce individuals to their genetic characteristics and to respect their uniqueness and diversity. Article 3 acknowledges that the human genome can be expressed differently according to each individual's natural and social environment, including the individual's state of health, living conditions, nutrition, and education, rejecting genetic determinism. Article 4 declares that the human genome in its natural state shall not give rise to financial gains. Article 10 affirms that no research or research applications concerning the human genome should prevail over respect for the human rights, fundamental freedoms, and human dignity of individuals or of groups of people. Article 11 prohibits practices that are contrary to human dignity, such as reproductive cloning of human beings, but there is no mention of therapeutic cloning.