We performed a GWAS of platelet count using 352,225 SNPs profiled with the Affymetrix Genome-Wide human SNP array 5.0 in 8,842 individuals from the Anseong and Ansan cohorts as described previously [13]. In a two-stage design (8,842 discovery and 7,861 replication samples), we confirmed three loci associated with platelet count at a genomewide significance level (< 1.0 × 10-7). Besides an unknown functional gene, we found two candidate genes, SH2B3 and BAK1, responsible for the variation in platelet counts. These genes are potential candidates for affecting platelet count.
Lymphocyte adapter protein (SH2B3, also known as LNK) is expressed in hematopoietic precursor cells and in endothelial cells and is known to be involved in inflammation [18]. LNK-deficient mice show a marked difference of hematopoiesis, accompanying increased numbers of various types of cells, such as megakaryocytes, B lymphoid, erythroid progenitor, and hematopoietic stem cells [19]. Several SNPs within the SH2B3 region are well known as variants associated with blood pressure, myocardial infarction, type 1 diabetes, and celiac disease [20].
BAK1, a multidomain pro-apoptotic family member, has shown to be involved in apoptotic cell death, playing a role as an essential mediator [21, 22, 23, 24]. Kamatani et al. [6] reported that BAK1 is a putative strong candidate gene accounting for numbers of platelets. This SNP is located in the 4th intron in BAK1 (Bcl2-antagonist/killer1), which encodes a protein acting as a strong proapoptotic effector that is known to control platelet lifespan [25]. The intrinsic machinery for apoptosis regulates the life span of anucleate platelets [25].
KIAA0232 has no known biological function and no clue for a related biological pathway. Given the weak linkage disequilibrium block around KIAA0232, further investigation is required for the biological function.
Some studies have discovered genetic factors associated with platelet count through genome-wide associated studies across diverse ethnic groups [12, 26]. Qayyum et al. [12] reported that a candidate gene, BAK1, was significant in African-Americans. Also, Shameer et al. [26] reported that SH2B3 and KIAA0232 in European ancestry were also significant in platelet count and mean platelet volume, respectively.
Numerous previous studies have demonstrated the association between platelet counts and various phenotypes in human and mice [27]. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Community (ARIC) study has shown that platelet counts are positively correlated with leukocytes [28]. Turakhia et al. [29] also reported the association between higher platelet counts and residual thrombus after fibrinolytic therapy, which is in agreement with the ARIC study. The evidence of a relationship between platelet count and insulin resistance in non-obese type 2 diabetic patients was reported from a study on Japanese [30]. The number of platelets is also a possible predictor of the risk of death and cardiovascular disease [31].
In conclusion, we identified and validated common variants at 1 novel locus, BAK1, and 2 known variants, SH2B and KIAA0232, responsible for the variation of platelet counts in population-based cohorts. Our research demonstrates the results from a meta-analysis and follow-up genotyping to retrieve positive evidence for the association of 3 loci with platelet counts. In addition, fine mapping and functional studies on the discovered loci will help us understand the hidden physiological mechanisms underlying platelet count.