Pair-wise structure alignment
Two measurements (RamRMSD and logPr) were used to determine the structural similarity of two aligned proteins, as described in the previous structure alignment study [1]. RamRMSD was named for the value representing the distance of the two points of the residues on the Ramachandran plots of the two proteins. While RamRMSD is the root mean square deviation of the Euclidean distance of the φ and ψ angles of matched residues, which is similar to the measurement of Δt used by Karpen et al. [3], logPr is the statistical quantity that describes the probability that a closer alignment than observed is possible. In this study, both the geometric distance of RamRMSD and statistical quantity of logPr were utilized for the assessment of the structural similarity [2]. The Euclidean distance can be defined as follows:
D = (Δφ2 + Δψ2)1/2,
where D is the distance and
Δφ2 = (φ1 - φ2)2, if (φ1 - φ2)2 ≤ 1802
(360 - |φ1 - φ2|)2, if (φ1 - φ2)2 > 1802
Δψ2 = (ψ1 - ψ2)2, if (ψ1 - ψ2)2 ≤ 1802
(360 - |ψ1 - ψ2|)2, if (ψ1 - ψ2)2 > 1802,
where φ1 and φ2 are φ angles from each residue and ψ1 and ψ2 are ψ angles from each residue. Conditional terms are added to find the smallest distance between any two angles with our -180° to +180° notation; i.e., for example, not to consider the distance of two angles, +180° and -180°, as 360° apart rather than 0° apart. The RamRMSD would be as follows:
where n is the total number of residues to be compared and Dk is the distance of points of kth residues of each protein on each Ramachandran plot as defined above. RMSD is weak to small number of local deviations [4]. logPr circumvents this problem of the RMSD and is defined as the logarithm of the mean probability of finding a closer angular similarity than the observed similarity in a random environment between each torsion angle pair of compared chains.
If the difference of the φ and ψ angles is defined as a vector Ω (ωφ1, ωψ1, ωφ2, ωψ2, … , ωφn, ωψn), where ωφk is the difference of two φ angles of the kth amino acid of each n-residue-long string and ωψk is the difference of two ψ angles of the kth amino acid of each n-residue-long string, the constant probability density function ρ (ω) and the Pr-value in a random environment could be mathematically written as follows:
where ω is the angular difference, and
where n is the number of total residues being compared and every angular difference is presumed to be statistically independent. Because multiplied values range from 0 to 1, the Pr-value is more strongly dependent for small values than for large values. We used the logPr-value to circumvent a computational overflow problem and used log base 10 for easy comprehension of the order of magnitude of the probability, Pr. Also, Bonferroni correction was applied for proper comparison of the similarities from protein pairs of different length. Thus, the logPr value could be defined as follows.
Global alignment with no gaps was performed using these two measurements. The comparison frame was shifted by a single residue for each frame with boundary conditions for the most similar alignment.