B chromosomes are supernumerary chromosomes in eukaryotes. The current report contains differential transcriptome profiles between 0B and 1B chromosome plants of L. amabile, an endemic lily in Korea. Transcriptome profiles were reported from the Lilium genus [19-22], but not from the L. amabile. Therefore, de novo assembly was conducted with L. amabile transcriptomes derived from fully expanded leaves. Our results are comparable to profiles from other Lilium species. Villacorta-Martin et al. [19] reported 42,430 genes from 121,572 transcripts that were derived from bulbs of commercial cultivar of L. longiflorum. Hu et al. [23] also reported transcriptomes from petals of cultivars from Sorbonne and Novano to elucidate differences in floral scent, of which 124,233 NCBI UniGene clusters from 229,128 transcripts were reported. Thus, our volume of data from 154,810 transcripts of 77,087 genes falls between these two studies.
In our study, approximately 20% of the transcripts from leaves were differently expressed between the 0B and 1B chromosome plants at the differential expression value of log2FC > |2|. However, only 0.6% of the total transcripts were differentially expressed in the stringent threshold of log2FC > |10| (FDR < 0.05). Our results are similar to the report of rye B chromosome analysis [24], in which approximately 0.6% cDNA-AFLP analysis showed differences between 0B and 1B chromosome plants, and there were 16 putative B chromosome-associated transcripts. Chromosome imbalance usually exhibits deleterious phenotypic consequences in A chromosome aneuploids; however, B chromosomes do not affect phenotype unless attaining certain numbers [4,25]. Disrupted genetic homeostasis by aneuploidy often impacts global modulation of gene expression, which is often obvious in complex ways [26]. Plants with a single B chromosome do not reveal morphological phenotypic differences from normal diploid plants in our study. Thus, further analyses, including gene expression profiles in multiple B chromosome plants, may provide explanation for the morphological indifferences. Presence of B chromosomes can disturb the expression of genes in A chromosomes. In maize, transcription of A chromosome genes was altered in the presence of B chromosomes, and the extent of alteration coincided with the number of B chromosomes [9]. Because most genetic material of B chromosomes is derived from A chromosomes [5,6], genes in B chromosomes can be paralogous to genes in A chromosomes. Most of the paralogous genes in B chromosomes become pseudogenes and are transcriptionally silenced because B chromosomes are selectively neutral [25-27]. Nevertheless, extra gene copy transcription from B chromosomes can result in knock-down mRNA of the paralogous genes of the A chromosome by RNA-directed RNA polymerase–induced RNAi degradation [8]. The proteins originated from B chromosomes can also act as an enhancer or suppressor of A chromosome genes [12]. Alternately, aberrant gene expression copies may be equalized by gene dosage compensation [8]. In our analysis, it was not possible to map the transcripts on the chromosomes because the gene map or chromosome substitution are not available for Lilium. Also, low-copy gene detection by fluorescent in situ hybridization is not a readily available technique for Lilium due to the huge genome size (36.5 pg) [28]. Nonetheless, the differentially expressed transcripts may mostly be products of genes on A chromosomes, but some of them may reside on the extra B chromosomes.
Our results showed that the DEG included mostly genes involved in the cell cycle and chromosome segregation [29,30]. Cyclin-dependent cycle (CDC), cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), and cyclin (CYC) genes were included in the DEG related to the cell cycle. CDC proteins are cell cycle controllers that associate with cyclins depending on developmental and environmental cues [29]. Control of chromosome segregation is essential for chromosome ploidy and stability in both somatic and meiotic cells [30]. Kinesins are motor proteins that move along microtubule filaments and are critically involved in chromosome segregation during mitosis and meiosis [30]. Interestingly, we found 31 KIN genes that were differentially expressed in our study. Of these genes, 23 were up-regulated and eight were down-regulated in 1B chromosome plants. Chromosome pairing maintains homologous chromosomes until anaphase to ensure proper chromosome segregation [30]. Several genes involved in chromosome pairing were also included in the DEG from our analyses [31]. We cannot infer the precise mechanism of DEG for de novo B chromosome occurrence and transmission at this stage. Reverse genetic approaches remain a challenge but may provide answers to de novo occurrence of B chromosomes for future studies.
In conclusion, B chromosomes are supernumerary chromosomes present in eukaryotes; however, the presence of these additional chromosomes does not display obvious phenotypic effects. B chromosomes are found in numerous species in the Lilium genus. Prior to the current report, no molecular or genomic studies were conducted to characterize B chromosomes in the Lilium species. In this study, we performed RNA-seq analysis from leaf tissues of 0B and 1B chromosome L. amabile plants. Of the 154,810 transcripts detected, 552 were up-regulated and 490 were down-regulated in 1B plants compared to the 0B plants with the differential expression value of log2FC > |10|. Most of the DEG included cell cycle and chromosome segregation related genes, which may be associated with the de novo occurrence and maintenance of B chromosomes. The DEG from the current analysis will provide a valuable resource for studying the accumulation of B chromosomes in plants and plant evolution.