IABio service architecture
Aiming to provide a genome database platform for IA, our study designs the IABio platform service structure in consideration of medical standard security and requirements as shown in Fig. 2.
By relevance to the genome, the users are divided into gene researcher, protein researcher, brain imaging researcher, and senior researcher. Each user can operate and monitor accessible data by his/her authority. In addition, the users can connect to it through a smart device or web service.
For users to have access to IABio, they should be issued authorization tokens from the authorization server. The authorization token functions to identify researchers using genome information and is physically separated from the IABio platform. When using such an authorization token, it is possible to access IABio. When an authorization token is not valid or when a user is not registered, the token should be issued or re-issued by the authorization server. Our study complies with IUA medical standard guidelines for access, uses OAuth 2.0, and composes the security system.
IABio is accessible through a web portal. Genome data entered by each researcher are entered in a database in an agreeable format to master patient index (MPI) structure. Because gene, protein, and brain imaging data are all in different data formats, a method is necessary to integrate them. Therefore, MPI is used. It allows scalability in connection with different clinical data. MPI configures the data format in a way to identify them, develops them into a hash-type algorithm, creates an identification system, and maintains data integrity. In an MPI-based identification system, each manager does not know the password structure. Therefore, researchers can not have access to different data. The security system of the proposed IABio platform has pre-defined password keys with the authorization server and performs the authorization and approval procedure by the user. The contents of MPI are not described here, because they are not part of the aim of this study.
Three analyses are performed to provide services from IABio. The first is proteomics analysis. Proteomics is a study concerned with the structure and analysis of proteins occurring in living organisms. It aims to analyze proteins on a great scale; write a map of functional interrelations; and demonstrate a certain protein and the gene that creates it through structural analysis. The second analysis is IA risk factor analysis. SNPs and protein markers related to IA yield risk factors for IA. In addition, it analyzes clinical data, such as survey, patient interview, functional magnetic resonance imaging, and brain imaging, in addition to a genome/protein index, in integrated manner, finally creating a diagnostic index. The third analysis is risk evaluation analysis. When risk factors highly relevant to IA are determined by integrated analysis of genome data, it generates an algorithm to provide a risk evaluation score for the respective factor. In this study, the contents of genome analyses are not described, because they are separate areas of study.
Because IABio service model proposed in our study can ensure safe access to information entered by users and can provide integrated data analysis service. It can be applied to several platforms as well as studies related to IA.