Genome-wide association studies have been aiming to find the association between a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and complex traits. It started as a single-locus approach that tested a single SNP at a time and selected the top SNPs. However, it has become clearer that most complex diseases are associated with multiple genes and their interactions. Therefore, a multi-locus approach is now regarded as a necessity [12]. Multifactor dimensionality reduction is one of the widely accepted methods for addressing this issue [3]. Meanwhile, it has been customary to categorize a phenotype into a binary trait to divide the observed outcomes into either a case or control (affected-unaffected). However, some diseases, such as obesity, are to be classified with several levels of affectedness [4]. In that case, it would be appropriate to perform a multi-class phenotype analysis. A disease, such as hypertension, may not be fully characterized by a single phenotype but by 2 or more observed phenotypes [5]. Then, a composite phenotype should be constructed and analyzed with genomic data to estimate the genome-wide association of the particular disease. Because the individual observables should have 2 or more classes, a composite phenotype would be a multi-class trait, with an indefinite number of classes. Combining the 2 aspects above, a genomic association study needs a method that is able to take gene-gene interactions and multi-class and multivariate traits into consideration simultaneously.
In this paper, we will apply a recently introduced generalized index of dissimilarity (GIDS) [5] to demonstrate a multivariate multi-class trait genomic association study with diabetes. A composite phenotype with the complete set of classes, which was constructed with 3 individual phenotypes obtained by measuring the blood glucose levels using different protocols [67], was analyzed with genomic data to estimate the genome-wide association. Gene-gene interactions and the main effect were investigated. Among the strongly associated SNPs, some were found to be consistent with previous results, while the rest of them were new findings. SNP pairs that were found to have a strong association are also presented.