Curative tools
Even after using various elaborate filters described above, it is often necessary for users to examine the alignment explicitly. We have developed several tools to facilitate visual inspection by users.
(1) Alignment plot is of great help to verify the genuine fusion events. We provide two different types of alignment plot as shown in Fig. 2. Fusion alignment view shows the alignment of fusion reads onto the synthetic fusion sequence. Progressive tiling pattern is the most desirable feature for the genuine fusion genes. Genome alignment view shows the alignment of fusion transcripts separately for head and tail genes as a custom track in the UCSC genome browser (Fig. 2B).
(2) Coverage plot from next-generation sequencing data provides valuable information on genomic or transcriptome structures. For example, abrupt depth change at exon boundaries often indicates the gene fusion or alternative splicing events. FusionScan provides coverage plots for head and tail genes. As shown in Fig. 2C, both the head and tail genes showed abrupt jump at the fusion boundaries in accordance with the BCR-ABL1 fusion event. Testing many RNA-Seq data, we found that this abrupt change applied well for most well-known cases, especially for the tail kinase genes.
(3) Split seed reads are the most direct evidence of gene fusion. In FusionScan, we acknowledge the split reads as the seed only if both sides were aligned to fusion exons over 20 bp long. In cases where only one side met the condition and the other side had a shorter aligned part, we classify them as the support reads, which still serve as indirect but good evidence of fusion event. To identify support reads, we realign all RNA-Seq reads to the synthetic chimeric transcripts using SSAHA2 again, and the result is reported with the number of seed reads or used in the fusion alignment plot. This process is optional since it demands realignment of all RNA-Seq reads, taking significant amount of computation. The fusion alignment view may include the support reads as shown in Fig. 2A.