Regulation of gene expression level is an important step in different biological processes [12]. The expression levels are the overall results of the transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations [13]. Codon usage bias usually refers to different frequencies of synonymous codons attributed to one specific amino acid [45]. Synonymous codons translate with different speeds; an event which indicates that the translational efficiency may be specifically modified by using different codons [6]. Furthermore, in some prokaryotes and eukaryotes, amino acid content is also known to be related with gene expression level [7]. Two major factors including natural selection and mutational bias are reported to explain such codon and amino acid usage bias [8]. However, this relationship, as proposed by the translation selection model, is less evident in mammals.
There is a clear relation between the expression levels of genes and codon composition in most organisms [5]. Nonetheless, due to tissue-specific gene expression, identification of factors affecting gene expression in multicellular organisms is much more complicated [9]. Thus, some studies have focused on the relation between tissue specific gene expression and compositional features of the genes. Sémon et al. [10] reported that selective pressure influenced the synonymous codon usage of human tissue-specific genes and modify the expression of special proteins. Also, Zhou et al. [9] identified some significant correlations between tissues specific oncogenes and sequence compositional features in human tissues. Then, Hajjari et al. [11] found that the structural elements in tumor suppressor genes and proteins can play important roles in their regulation. However, it is still unclear whether translational selection affects other human genes specifically based on their tissue expression patterns [12].
Apoptosis, the process of programmed cell death, is considered as a crucial component of different processes such as normal cell cycle, development, and function of the immunity system [13]. Different genes controlling the apoptosis process have been identified. Since the expression levels of genes involved in apoptosis are different in human tissues, we aimed to find if the compositional features of these genes are involved in their regulation. Considering the important role of these genes in cellular and molecular function, the results may provide new clues about their tissue specific regulation. Since the dysregulation of these genes is a common event in some diseases especially cancers, the unraveling different mechanisms of their regulation may also reveal novel strategies for therapeutic intervention.
In this study, we tried to elucidate the potential correlation between some compositional features of genes/proteins structures and their expression level in some human tissues. The results may reveal the support for the relation between codon usage, amino acid usage and tissue specific gene expression.