Kawasaki disease (KD) is an acute, self-limited vasculitis that predominantly occurs in children between the ages of 6 months and 5 years old. Approximately half of all KD patients are between 6 months to 2 years of age, which is the peak incidence age of KD [1, 2]. The etiology of KD is not known, and it has no specific diagnostic test. As such, KD diagnosis is based solely on six clinical symptoms: prolonged fever, bilateral conjunctival injection, erythema of the oral mucosa, lips, and tongue, polymorphous rash, erythema of the palms and soles, and cervical lymphadenopathy [3]. Complete KD is diagnosed when patients have at least five of the above six clinical symptoms, and incomplete KD is diagnosed when patients have less than four of the six clinical symptoms. The standard treatment of KD is a high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which is derived from pooled plasma of healthy donors, reducing the duration of fever and the incidence of coronary artery abnormalities [4, 5].
KD is considered an abnormal immunological reaction to an infection or unknown immunological triggers in genetically susceptible individuals [6, 7]. B cell–related genes including BLK, CD40, and FCGR2A were also identified as KD susceptibility genes by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) [8-10]. In particular, a reduced level of BLK expression in blood B cells may be a crucial reason for dysfunction of B cells and a pathogenesis of KD [10, 11]. Our previous study identified that a risk allele in FCGR2A was only susceptible for KD patients younger than 1 year of age, whereas the KD susceptible allele in BLK affected all ages of KD patients, except those older than 5 years of age. This result revealed a possibility that there are other genetic variants affecting specific age subgroups of KD patients. In this study, to further identify age-specific susceptibility genes of KD in KD patients younger than 6 months or older than 5 years of age, we performed an age-stratified GWAS and a replication study and identified lymphoid enhancer binding factor 1 (LEF1) as a KD susceptibility gene specifically affecting KD patients younger than 6 months of age.