Cancers have traditionally been accepted as diseases that are induced by the accumulation of a set of genetic mutations that have been considered the major causes of neoplasia [1]. But, is genomic instability a consequence of cancer progression or indeed a cause that drives cancer development? From about 1902 up until now, the involvement of genomic instability in tumorigenesis has long been the subjet of debate. In the beginning, Theodor Boveri's work with sea urchins showed that all chromosomes are required for normal development, known as the Boveri-Sutton chromosome theory. He had also suggested in 1902 that malignant tumors might be the result of a certain abnormal condition of the chromosomes, which may arise from multipolar mitosis. In the last century, remarkable findings and progresses in cancer research have added genomic instability to the hallmark list of cancer. Moreover, genomic instability generates the genetic and phenotypic heterogenicity and diversity that expedite tumorigenesis and the acquisition of cancer hallmarks.
Our genomes are constantly threatened by a number of challenges that are originating from extracellular and intracellular stimuli. Effective cellular responses to these enormous genotoxic stresses are acutely required to maintain genomic integrity. These stresses can induce a variety of problems in the DNA, such as double-strand breaks, single-strand breaks, oxidative lesions, and pyrimidine dimers. Eukaryotes have evolved elaborate DNA damage response (DDR) mechanisms to properly respond to the genotoxic stresses of these lesions. DNA damage induces several cellular responses, including checkpoint activation, DNA repair, and the triggering of apoptotic pathways for irreparable DNA damage (Fig. 1). Underlying these DDRs are functions of many tumor suppressors, which are frequently lost in cancers. To keep the genome intact, DNA replication must be carried out without error, and if there is a mistake, it should be repaired correctly. Also, to give time for cells to repair any defect, cells must have intact checkpoint responses. Replicated genomes must be passed to daughter cells without error; therefore, either miscopying or missegregation of chromosomes should be avoided. If these self-guarding machineries are not effective, cells that have problems should die. So, DNA replication, DNA repair, transcription, cell cycle machinery, chromosome segregation, and apoptosis are six domains to keep genomic integrity. Also, these DDRs are coordinately regulated and work together, via a series of signaling pathways that eventually activate surveillance and checkpoints for genomic integrity. In other words, cancer cells have problems in these machineries, leading to genomic instability.