Integromics: Integration of multiple-omics data
Previous studies undoubtedly showed that gene expression patterns (or signatures) are useful markers that can stratify patients and offer useful prognostic information [18, 37-42]. The current research focus has moved to uncovering genetic/epigenetic factors that are key regulators of specific signaling pathways altered in malignant cancer cells, potentially guiding the discovery of new therapeutic (and druggable) targets [8, 43-45]. But, the selection of such candidates for future validations from long gene lists produced by genome-wide screening is a significant challenge because of potential confounding factors embedded in many genome-wide data from human cancers. Furthermore, because the gene expression data from tumor tissues only provide "snapshot" information of genetic/epigenetic alterations and lack in-depth information on interactive and time-dependent alterations during tumor progression, it is not easy to distinguish the driver genes from passenger genes whose alterations simply echo changes in cell proliferation or organ physiology.
As discussed earlier, CGH analyses have identified many recurrent candidate loci of DNA copy number changes in liver cancer. Some of these genomic regions have well-recognized tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. However, because of the large number of candidate genes in the identified genomic loci, functional validation of all candidates would be impractical. Thus, there is an urgent demand for development of a new approach that would quickly prioritize candidates according to the likelihood of their direct involvement in tumor development.
In a previous study, systematic integration of gene copy number data and gene expression from the same patients has been proposed to identify potential driver genes [46]. This study demonstrated that DNA copy number alteration data provide additional prognostic significance. Integrative analysis of copy number alteration data and gene expression further identified 50 driver candidates whose activation was triggered by copy number amplifications of genes and also significantly associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes in liver cancer.
Alterations in DNA copy number and expression patterns of thousands of genes are important characteristics of many cancer cells. Because the use of high-throughput microarray-based technologies, mass spectrometry, and second-generation sequencers for the analysis of cancer genomes inevitably produces many false-positive results, it is not easy to select practical numbers of candidate genes for future evaluation of them as therapeutic targets and/or prognostic/predictive biomarkers. Therefore, it is important to combine two or more genomic scale datasets (e.g., array-based CGH data, promoter methylation, and expression of coding or non-coding genes), collected independently from the same tissues (Fig. 1).
RPPA is a newly established proteomic technology [24-27] that provides quantitative assessment of the expression and modification of many proteins. For example, the phosphorylation level of particular proteins can be estimated easily by using antibodies specific to certain phosphorylation sites of proteins. Use of the phosphorylation antibodies allows us to assess the signaling pathways by looking at many kinase substrates simultaneously through multiplexed phosphorylation-specific antibody analysis. However, assessment of signaling pathways by RPPA is restricted by the availability of antibodies with very high specificity. This limitation can be overcome by integration of multiple datasets for systematic analysis. Integration of proteomic data with genomic data would significantly help us have better insights into tumor development and progression. Furthermore, contributor genes (or drivers) will be quickly identified by integration of proteomic data with one or more genomic datasets.