Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a complex disorder related to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and cardiovascular diseases, and its prevalence is continuously increasing worldwide [1, 2]. Insulin resistance, obesity, and inflammation are major factors leading to MetS; however, the effect of genetic and environmental factors cannot be ignored [3]. Sedentary lifestyle, decreased physical activity, high caloric intake, and westernized food habits are environmental factors leading to obesity and MetS [4, 5]. Parental and maternal obesity in early pregnancy is related to increased risk of childhood obesity, which could later lead to obesity in young adulthood [6, 7]. In addition, family history of obesity, insulin resistance, and T2DM can increase the risk of MetS, implying the importance of genetic contribution. Candidate gene studies in MetS identified genes involved in glucose and insulin signaling, such as insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARG), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), and genes involved in lipid metabolism, such as adiponectin (ADIPOQ), apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5), and low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) [3, 8, 9, 10]. Through genome-wide association studies (GWASs), a larger number of candidate genes could be further analyzed, and important susceptibility loci were discovered, including fat mass and obesity associated protein (FTO) and the melanocortin 4 receptor gene (MC4R), which were associated with body mass index (BMI) [11, 12]. In another GWAS of MetS, the lipid locus at rs964184 was associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol and very low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol [13]. In a meta-analysis in Korea that used the GWAS results from the Korea Associated Resource (KARE) cohort, susceptibility loci in 12q24.11 and 12q24.13 were associated with HDL-cholesterol levels, and genetic factors associated with osteoporosis and metabolic traits, such as T2DM, dyslipidemia, and obesity, could also be identified [14, 15, 16].
GWASs have their strengths in screening susceptible genes associated with complex diseases [17, 18]. However, GWASs focus more on individual single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that meet a stringent statistical significance, rather than explaining the interaction of genes, and they can only explain a small portion of genetic heritability [19, 20, 21]. In addition, due to its small effect size, certain SNPs in a GWAS that have been identified to be associated with a disease might not show up in another study of the same disease. This can be seen in two published studies of T2DM and Crohn's disease, which could not find most of the proven susceptibility loci through GWASs and succeeded in achieving moderate significance after replication studies or meta-analysis [22, 23]. To overcome this limitation, pathway-based approaches have been introduced to improve the interpretability of the GWAS.
Pathway-based analysis integrates GWAS data with genes in the selected biological pathways or gene sets from predefined human databases [19, 24]. The strength of pathway analysis is its large effect size and higher power to detect genes that might have been missed through a GWAS [24, 25, 26]. Pathway analysis, such as Meta-analysis Gene-Set Enrichment of Variant Associations (MAGENTA), only requires the SNP p-values and chromosome positions, simplifying the analysis of GWASs [27]. MAGENTA analyzes the statistical power of GWASs through integration of variant association p-values into gene scores, correcting for confounding factors, such as gene size, SNP density, and linkage disequilibrium properties [27]. Through MAGENTA analysis, biological pathways associated with triglyceride, HDL-cholesterol, T2DM, and BMI have been identified [27, 28, 29]. Pathway analysis is a supplementary way to further analyze the results of GWASs. However, there are few studies that have used this approach to identify biological pathways associated with MetS in Asians. The aim of this study was to further elucidate the genomic data of the KARE cohort and to identify the biological pathways related with MetS through a pathway-based approach.