Web components make it easy to add customized elements to web pages so they can easily be embedded into any web page. In order to parse and render scholarly publication metadata as well as semantic annotations from their text, we have created two web components. Our web components take their input, parse it and render it following the corresponding Bioschemas markup. The markup is added at the end of the web page as a new element, such element corresponds to a script with the MIME-type “application-json”. We have chosen this asynchronous approach as it makes it easier for web page providers to optimize the end-user content, leaving any Biotea-Bioschemas machine-readable bits to the end. Rendering the markup as JSON-LD also provides readable HTML, as it keeps the content separated from the markup. A possible drawback in this approach is the uncertainty regarding the capacity of crawlers to support asynchronous loading of the structured metadata. Asynchronous loading is nowadays a common approach on web page development and therefore should be supported by main search engines when it comes to structured metadata. Bioschemas has already recognized this and therefore has initiated efforts to contribute with a crawler capable to deal with delayed loading (https://github.com/ricardoaat/bioschemas-gocrawlit).
The Biotea-bioschemas-metadata web component requires as input a JATS XML response from the PMC-OA Interface service (PMC-OAI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/tools/oai/). It converts such a response into a JSON object and then selects elements of interest such as title authors, publication data and abstract and map them to the Biotea-Bioschemas profiles. For our second web component, biotea-bioschemas-annotations, we use PubAnnotation [9] annotations as main input. Although it is possible to use the NCBO annotator service on the fly, doing so poses a problem regarding the obtained annotations. The NCBO annotator works with the current version of the ontologies hosted by the NCBO ontology portal (https://bioportal.bioontology.org/), as ontologies are updated, so could annotations using such ontologies, meaning that a different set of annotations for the same article could be recovered at different times. In order to avoid this, we have created a Biotea project in PubAnnotation so we can host there a set of frozen annotations used to provide the corresponding Bioschemas markup.
As a proof of concept, we have uploaded 2,596 full text articles, annotated their abstracts with 13 ontologies from Bioportal, covering gene, protein, drug, disease and symptom areas, for a total of 894,926 annotations, and exposed them via PubAnnotation. Our web components can be seen in action in our Biotea-Bioschemas main page (http://biotea.github.io/bioschemas). Although it is possible to use our web components with any PMC-OA article or any PubAnnotation PMC hosted annotation set, we have limited our showcase to those 2,596 articles currently hosted at PubAnnotation. All of the articles are included in a sitemap, making it easier for search engines to index the content. In Fig. 2 we show the markup corresponding to PMC-OA article identified as PMC2628047, the corresponding URL is http://biotea.github.io/bioschemas?pmc=2628047.