HP1 and chromatin structure
HP1 proteins are mostly enriched at heterochromatin centromeres and pericentromeric regions, telomeres and subtelomeric regions, and transcriptionally repressive genes. However, HP1 is also found at euchromatic sites [40, 41], though whether euchromatic HP1 has a disparate function and which HP1 paralog is located at euchromatin remain unclarified. A structure-based study revealed that a hydrophobic pocket of the HP1 CD interacts with histone H3K9me [42]. This epigenetic mark is generated by a conserved family of HMTs, named after the Drosophila member SU (VAR)3-9, discovered as a suppressor factor involved in position-effect variegation [43, 44]. Both HP1 and SU (VAR)3-9 function in heterochromatin structure formation. Loss of SU(VAR)3-9 results in displacement of HP1 from heterochromatic regions and alteration in gene repression [45]. Mechanisms by which HP1 localizes to euchromatin sites appear to involve more than the recognition of H3K9me, which is poorly understood. An alternative mechanism of localization might be mediated via interactions between its CSD and other factors. HP1 CSD homodimerizes through an alpha-helical region and generates a platform that can interact with the PxVxL motif in its interacting partner proteins, such as DNMT1/3, SU(VAR) 3-9, and the p150 subunit of CAF-1 (Fig. 5) [46]. A second alternative mechanism of localization on chromatin involves interactions with RNA through a hinge domain, such that association of HP1 with specific loci in Drosophila and centric regions in mouse makes them susceptible to RNase treatment [39, 47]. For example, it has been demonstrated that an HP1 subcode with sumoylation plays a role in heterochromatin architecture, via its association with microsatellite RNAs [48]. A third mechanism for chromatin localization is found at the distal ends of Drosophila telomeres, where HP1 is thought to bind DNA directly [49]. However, in mammals, localization of HP1 proteins to telomeric regions occurs via H3K9 association [50-53]. Together, HP1 localizes to chromatin using both genetic (DNA or RNA sequence) and epigenetic (histone modification) information.