Minor salivary gland lip biopsy specimens
Microarray analyses have proven to be valuable in determining differentially-expressed miRNAs in the field. One of the first studies by Alevizos et al. [15] utilizing miRNA microarray for miRNAs in SjS MSG revealed a correlation between relative expression of selected miRNAs and the MSG focus score (FS). Among those miRNAs, miR-768-3p showed a positive correlation whereas miR-574 showed a negative correlation with FS, which was validated as markers of inflammation by qRT-PCR in an independent cohort. In addition, comparing miRNAs from patients with preserved vs. low salivary flow identified nine of differentially expressed miRNA, seven of which were up-regulated in the group with decreased salivary gland function. This suggests that the predicted targets of upregulated miRNA, which was associated with salivary dysfunction, may have a protective effect on epithelial cells.
Another comparative microarray analysis of miRNA expression in the MSGs of SjS and HC revealed distinctive miRNA signatures in SjS patients, associated with glandular inflammation and dysfunction [16]. MiRNAs that were predicted to target Ro/SSA and La/SSB autoantigens were upregulated in the MSG tissues (miR-181a), salivary gland epithelial cells (SGEC) (miR-200b) and PBMC (miR-223) of SjS in comparison with HC. miR-181a and miR-16 overexpression in MSG tissues of SjS patients has been previously shown to be associated with salivary dysfunction [15]. Interestingly, down-regulated expression of let-7b miRNA was observed in SGECs of SjS patients who were positive for Ro/SSA and/or La/SSB compared to seronegative patients. The authors hypothesized that the increased expression of miR-181a, miR-200b and miR-223 miRNAs in SjS may represent a negative feedback loop for the control of the elevated Ro/SSA and La/SSB expression and/or their inefficiency to regulate target expression.
In a subsequent study in 2015 by the same group, the authors further investigated 29 SjS patients (20 of 29 positive for anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB) and 24 non-SjS sicca controls to study possible associations between autoantigen mRNA expression and disease features [20]. The upregulated levels of miR-16 in MSGs, miR-200b-3p in SGECs, and miR-223 and miR-483-5p in PBMCs of SjS patients compared to non-SjS sicca controls were identified. Interestingly, the levels of miR-16 in MSGs and miR-483-5p in PBMC of SjS were not significantly altered in their previous study [16]. This may be due to the heterogeneous clinical features of SjS, resulting in subtle differences in the subjects recruited for those two studies. Nonetheless, the MSG and PBMC levels of let-7b, miR-16, and miR-181a were correlated positively with Ro52/TRIM21-mRNA. Significantly lower miR-200b-5p levels were also detected in SjS patients with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma compared to those SjS without lymphoma. The exact roles of dysregulated miRNAs in their study in promoting autoantigen expression and autoantibody production would be interesting to follow-up.
Recent high-throughput approaches such as NGS have been applied to sequence entire genomes or transcriptomes within days. This technology has yielded exciting discovery of unknown genes or small miRNAs with a challenge of mining large amounts of data. A study utilizing NGS revealed several previously unidentified miRNAs in the MSG of pSjS patients which were then validated in other cell lines [21]. The authors found hsa-miR-4524b-3p and hsa-miR-4524b-5p and hsa-miR-5100 particularly interesting to further pursue. Although the results were based on a relatively small number of patient samples, potentially due to cost-intensive NGS, from whole MSG biopsy specimens, thus including a mix of cells, the study showed a promising feasibility of discovering novel miRNAs by NGS.
A number of important contributions to the field of miRNA research have been made by identifying the functions of differentially-expressed miRNAs. An innovative study focusing on Epstein Barr virus (EBV) miRNA, ebv-miR-BART13-3p, indicated the presence of the miRNA in both B cells and SGEC in pSjS salivary glands [22]. As EBV typically infects B cells, the authors further demonstrated that ebv-miRBART13-3p can be transferred from B cells to SGEC through exosomes and that it targets stromal interacting molecule 1 (STIM1) and aquaporin 5 (AQP5), which are important regulators of salivary secretion via the Ca2+-mediated signaling pathway. The data suggest a mechanism by which EBV can contribute to secretory dysfunction in SjS. This might also explain why the degree of immune cell infiltration and secretory dysfunction are not always correlated in SjS. Additionally, the role of EBV in SjS pathogenesis needs to be revisited since it has been underestimated due to inconsistency in the prevalence, localization, or expression levels of virus in patients [26–30].
A recent study by Martini et al. investigated miR-126 and miR-335-5p in MSG biopsies and their known target molecule, cystatin S [23]. The results indicated that salivary cystatin S was significantly decreased in pSjS (n=40) vs. HC (n = 20), especially in those with reduced secretory function. A positive correlation was observed between salivary cystatin S and unstimulated flow rate. Salivary cystatin S was also significantly reduced in patients with a submandibular gland ultrasonography score ≥2. Interestingly, the expression levels of miR-126 and miR-335-5P increased inversely with salivary flow rate. The authors proposed cystatin S as a promising biomarker for pSjS as it strongly correlated with glandular dysfunction. The cystatin S transcript did not change significantly, suggesting posttranscriptional regulation.