According to the current estimate, the human genome harbors around 22,000 genes and 200,000 mRNA transcripts [4]. One way that variations in the genomic sequence can exert phenotypic differences is through the alteration of structure and function of the gene products. Genetic variation may also result in changes in the expression levels of products and, thereby, their activities. Since most SNPs identified through GWASs do change the amino acid sequence of a protein, large portions of the genetic variation may be regulatory in nature. Differences in gene expression profiles between individuals then become molecular and intermediate phenotypes that in turn induce changes in higher-order disease traits [5]. In fact, Cheung et al. [6] observed some genes showing markedly different expression levels between individuals and familial aggregation of expression phenotypes. In their follow-up study using 14 large families, they also identified approximately 1,000 expression phenotypes that showed significant evidence of linkage to specific chromosomal regions [7]. Dixon et al. [8] also observed heritable expression patterns in about 30% of the genes and transcripts of their probes and identified the genomic regions where the genotypes were associated with those expression phenotypes. These are termed expression QTL (eQTL) and can be proximal (cis) or distal (trans) to the gene of expression variation (Fig. 1). Other species also show eQTL. For example, eQTLs have been observed in recombinant inbred mouse strains [9-11], yeast [12, 13], and plants [14].
The B-lymphoblastoid cell lines established by the International HapMap Project provide invaluable resources for the study of eQTL: for these samples, matched genotypes and expression profiles are publicly available. It is well known that genome-wide genotype profiles have the power to discriminate continental populations. Principal component analysis of the genotypes of the HapMap populations clearly clusters the individuals according to their population origins [15]. On the other hand, it appears that the population difference in expression levels is negligible [16] or very small [17]. For example, the expression levels averaged over each population are highly correlated between populations (Fig. 2). Apparently, the within-group expression variance is much larger than the between-group variance. This is perhaps due to the fact that unlike genotypes that can drift somewhat freely without functional alteration, gene expression levels are tightly regulated by complex genetic programs. Instead of focusing on population differences in expression levels, intense effort has been made to cataloging eQTLs and classifying them into cis and trans. For example, using the HapMap samples of European and African ancestry, Duan et al. [18] found about 5,000 expression quantitative nucleotides (eQTNs) in each population. They used 4 Mb of distance between the gene and SNP as the criteria for classifying local and distant eQTNs and observed that genes harboring distant eQTNs were enriched with functions, like transmembrane signal transduction, implying roles in gene expression regulation [18]. Stranger et al. [17] used all 270 HapMap samples to identify at least 1,348 and 180 genes showing cis and trans association signals, respectively. Their result is in sharp contrast to the previous estimate that counts most eQTLs as trans rather than cis [7]. Veyrieras et al. [19] reanalyzed the HapMap data using a sophisticated Bayesian hierarchical model to resolve the eQTLs at a fine scale: most eQTLs lay either within genes or close to genes (<20 kb); eQTLs were enriched around transcription start sites and 250 bp upstream of transcription end sites, and exons were more likely to be eQTLs than introns. Their finding of enriched eQTLs upstream of transcription end sites is interesting, in that this site is related to post-transcriptional control and mRNA stability. This underscores the important role of mRNA stability besides transcription initiation in determining steady-state mRNA levels [19].