A number of research projects using large-scale health record datasets have been conducted in various communities around the globe. For example, the NSF BIGDATA program solicitation (http://www.nsf.gov), which is partially funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), includes large-scale data collection and analysis. This program aims to advance the core scientific and technological means of managing, analyzing, visualizing, and extracting useful information from large, diverse, distributed, and heterogeneous datasets.
INBIOMEDvision (http://www.inbiomedvision.eu) is a two-year initiative funded by the European Commission 7th Framework Program of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), with the aim of bridging the communities of bioinformatics and medical informatics. It is a coordination support action (FP7) that has the aim of promoting biomedical informatics by means of permanent monitoring of the scientific state-of-the-art and existing activities in the theme, execution of prospective analyses on the emerging challenges and opportunities, and dissemination of knowledge in the field [7].
The Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE) Network is a national consortium organized by National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) to develop, disseminate, and apply approaches to research. It combines DNA biorepositories with EMR systems for large-scale, high-throughput genetic research with the ultimate goal of returning genomic testing results to patients in a clinical care setting. The network is currently exploring more than a dozen phenotypes (with 13 additional electronic algorithms having already been published). Various models of returning clinical results have been implemented or planned for pilot at sites across the network. Themes of bioinformatics, genomic medicine, privacy, and community engagement are of particular relevance to eMERGE [8].
In addition to nationwide collaboration projects, there is a research project using large-scale EHRs. Hanauer et al. [9] used large-scale, longitudinal EHR data to conduct research on associations of medical diagnoses and to explore patterns of specific disease progression. Lin et al. [10] proposed a symptom-disease treatment (SDT) association rule, mining a comprehensive EHR of approximately 2.1 million records from a major hospital. Based on selected International Classification of Disease (ICD-9) codes, they were able to identify clinically relevant and accurate SDT associations from patient records in seven distinct diseases, ranging from cancers to chronic and infectious diseases.