Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone tumor, representing over 56% of all bone tumors. It generally affects young people with the age of 15 to 19 and usually occurs in long bones near the metaphyseal growth plates. It has a high tendency to metastasize, and about 10%-20% of patients have macroscopic evidence of metastasis at the time of diagnosis, while 80%-90% of patients are assumed to have micrometastasis. Although it has been postulated that rapid bone growth, exposure to radiation, and genetic predispositions, such as RB or p53 mutations, are thought to be risk factors for developing osteosarcoma, the etiology has not been fully understood [1, 2, 3].
Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), also called as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), catalyzes the convertsion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2, from which various prostanoids, including prostaglandin E2, are produced [4].
Accumulating evidence indicates that COX-2 is involved in osteosarcoma development and progression. Several studies have reported that high levels of COX-2 expression is associated with advanced clinical stage and metastasis [5, 6], as well as with lower overall survival rates and disease-free survival rates [7, 8, 9]. In addition, COX-2 inhibition by using RNAi or antisense oligonucleotide inhibits cell proliferation and invasion in human osteosarcoma cells [10, 11]. Also, selective COX-2 inhibitors reduce not only osteosarcoma cell proliferation and invasion in vitro but also tumor growth and metastasis in vivo [12, 13]. Moreover, we have previously reported that COX-2 overexpression promotes cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in U2OS human osteosarcoma cells [14]. These studies strongly suggest that COX-2 might be a causal factor for the development and progression of osteosarcoma. However, the exact mechanisms of action of COX-2 in osteosarcoma are largely unknown.
In an attempt to figure out the mechanism of action of COX-2 in osteosarcoma, we analyzed the gene expression profiles in three COX-2-overexpressed U2OS stable cell lines and three control stable cell lines.