In this project, we used data from Oryzabase (http://pubannotation.org/projects/OryzaGP), a rice comprehensive database for Oryza sativa species published online since 2,000 by Japanese researchers. The latest version of Oryzabase contains 21,739 of rice genes, collected from 44,837 distinct scientific articles. Consequently, we used this information to create the basis of the OryzaGP dataset. Then we used PubMed as a resource to collect the raw data that was later preprocessed to compose the dataset, and developed a custom script implementing the BioPython library to query and retrieve the specific abstracts from PubMed. However, a number of scientific articles were not available in the PubMed database, due to some historical issues and lack of published resources. Due to the limited access of some resources, 10,400 articles were processed after filtering. The detailed raw data is shown in Table 1.
By focusing on the entities of the rice genome, we used the Oryzabase gene list as the ground truth to build up our dataset by keyword matching terms. The first step to preprocessing the data was filtering to remove special characters from the raw data. In fact, due to the number of articles used, the time range of articles was also wide, in that several articles were published in previous decades. To handle the problems of OCR-errors (which appear in the scanned text), we manually removed all the null and nonsense characters in utf-16 in the raw text. All the work was processed by our scripts and then after first step preprocessing. Moreover, we added part-of-speech (POS) tags for each word, to define its type with the aim, to ensure the accuracy of the identification of entities. The POS tagging process is supported by the Natural Language ToolKit (NLTK). To tokenize data, each word was considered a token, given in the following lines; one token per line, and included three tabs: the word itself, the POS tag, and the entity type (Fig. 1). To minimize the errors of inaccurate tags assignation when running the script, preprocessed data were checked manually, based on the existing resources (Oryzabase gene list, etc.)
During the 5th Biomedical Linked Annotation Hackathon (BLAH5, http://blah5.linkedannotation.org/), a portion of the dataset (29,098 annotation instances made to 6,107 abstracts) was uploaded to the PubAnnotation repository (http://pubannotation.org/projects/OryzaGP), which uses JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) as its default format, to store annotations. Resultantly, the dataset is accessible through or downloadable from PubAnnotation. Sharing it through PubAnnotation also means that the dataset can be compared to annotations from other projects if they share the same documents [7].