Since the initial publications in 2011, numerous studies have discovered unique sets of miRNAs that may play a critical role in SjS disease pathogenesis. Some miRNAs have been reported as novel biomarkers for SjS while other miRNAs are uniquely expressed in certain tissues or in biological samples of SjS in comparison with controls; however, the specificity and sensitivity of SjS-associated miRNAs along with their functional implications are yet to be confirmed by in-depth analyses. MiRNA studies tend to utilize a relatively small sample size, partly due to cost-intensive high-throughput approaches; therefore, results should be confirmed in an independent cohorts of patients, ideally in collaboration with other centers or institutes.
In addition, as SjS is a clinically heterogeneous disease, selection of eligible patients for a study can be challenging. Furthermore, different assay systems with different stringency tend to yield inconsistent data among studies as well. Ever evolving diagnostic criteria can certainly add one more layer of complexity when it comes to patient-oriented studies. To minimize those challenges and avoid unnecessary confusions over the collected data, it would be desirable to establish a consensus over diagnostic criteria and subject eligibility among investigators before initiating a new study.
Translation of current discoveries will allow the identification of biomarkers and development of miRNA-based therapeutics in the near future. miRNA therapeutics are known to provide specificity, efficacy, and markedly reduced toxicity compared to other treatment modalities [59–61]. A development of miRNA-targeted molecular therapy in autoimmune diseases, especially for SjS, would be an exciting treatment option in the near future. Further understanding of the regulatory network of miRNA expression will expedite the development of the miRNA-targeted, personalized therapy. With different forms of RNAs such as long non-coding RNAs actively being investigated recent years, discoveries of non-coding RNA species that have been reported to date in the field of SjS may only be the tip of the iceberg.