Most important concern is whether commercial genetic services’ predictive value is sufficient to meet the standards for clinical use. The clinical utility of a genetic test should be an essential criterion for deciding to offer this test to a person or a group of persons [9].
Reliability has been one of the major issues from the beginning even in United States. Dr. Craig Ventor reported the discrepancies of the interpretation of the same individuals between 23andMe and Navigenics [10]. GAO (Government Accountability Office) in United States also investigated inconsistent interpretations among DTC genetic testing companies [11]. And more, Tandy-Connor et al. [12] reported 40% of variants in a variety of genes reported in DTC raw data were false positives in United States. There was a comparison of two persons between two Korean DTC genetic testing companies and the concordance rate is low [13]. It is very difficult to judge which one is the accurate result when the discrepancies happen. Even when their results show the same results, it does not guarantee the results are true.
Establishing reliable prediction models by DTC genetic testing needs advancements under current situation. Currently most DTC genetic testing companies use single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for predictive models among genome-wide association study (GWAS) results from the relevant literatures. In case of single SNPs for complex disease or trait, its predictive performances would be almost meaningless because odds ratio of most validated SNPs are below 1.5 except few SNPs such as APOE4 allele to Alzheimer’s Diseases [14]. That is, without counting the other many SNPs, counting only one SNP is not likely to show good performances as company claims. Thus, it comes to use multiple SNPs for predictive models.
In case of using multiple SNPs, Some SNPs come from the study of Korean subjects, but many SNPs depend on the results from Caucasian subjects. Considering the experiences from GWAS studies among Korean subjects, most validated SNPs from Caucasian subjects without studying Korean subjects are likely to be replicated among Korean subjects although not all of them. However, when applying to Korean population, the odds ratio of the used SNPs in the predictive model is critical to calculate the relative risk of the individual consumer. But the magnitudes of relative risks of the each validated SNPs between Caucasian and Korean subjects do not show same values. Therefore, the established models for each trait need to be validated for Korean patients prospectively at least. But the most company-run or company-plan-to-run traits show lack of these evidences. It is not possible to judge or estimate which company supports better predictive models or result. This situation drives to go to marketing with exaggerations and abuse of tests or price competition rather than competing to improve the quality of prediction.