Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase, also called as cyclooxygenase (COX), is an enzyme converting arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). PGH2 is a common precursor for prostanoid biosynthesis such as PGD2, PGE2, PGF2α, PGI2, and thromboxane A2. These prostanoids are known to be important chemical mediators for inflammation as well as other biological processes [1]. There are two isoforms of COX. COX-1 (PTGS1) is expressed constitutively in most cells and responsible for basal level of prostanoid biosynthesis. COX-2 (PTGS2) is induced by various stimuli such as bacterial endotoxins, cytokines, genotoxic agents, growth factors, or oncogene products [23].
Most non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are COX inhibitors. These drugs inhibit the COX catalytic activity by occupying the active site of COX. Aspirin, ibuprofen, or flurbiprofen is a non-selective COX inhibitor, which inhibits both COX-1 and COX-2 catalytic activity. In contrast, NS-398, celecoxib, or nimesulide is a selective COX-2 inhibitor, which inhibits COX-2 catalytic activity specifically [34].
The mechanism of aging has not been fully understood. However, it has been proposed that the pro-inflammatory catalytic activity of COX-2 is a causal factor for aging. The hypothesis proposes that reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated in the process of normal metabolism or inflammation activate the transcription factor nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). NF-κB increases the transcription of pro-inflammatory target genes such as COX-2, which in turn stabilizes a chronic inflammatory circuit by generating ROS. This chronic inflammation causes tissue damage and aging [5].
If the pro-inflammatory catalytic activity of COX-2 is a causal factor for aging, COX-2 inhibitors should conceivably inhibit aging. In this context, we have previously examined the effect of COX-2 inhibitors on aging both in the replicative cellular senescence model of human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) and in the intrinsic skin aging model of hairless mice. We observed that among three selective COX-2 inhibitors studied, only NS-398 inhibited the cellular senescence whereas celecoxib and nimesulide accelerated the senescence. In addition, three non-selective COX inhibitors including aspirin, ibuprofen, and flurbiprofen accelerated the senescence [6]. Also, we observed that only NS-398 inhibited the skin aging while celecoxib and aspirin accelerated the skin aging in hairless mice [3]. These studies strongly suggest that the pro-inflammatory catalytic activity of COX-2 is not a causal factor for aging and that the aging-modulating effect of COX inhibitors is attributable to a catalytic activity–independent mechanism.
In an attempt to figure out underlying mechanisms by which COX inhibitors modulate aging, we here performed cDNA microarray experiment and subsequent Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in HDFs treated with three COX inhibitors, NS-398, celecoxib, and aspirin.