In recent years, biodata mining has new research problems that are related to the concept of composite data points. A data point is said to be a composite data point when it is a dataset; in other words, when it has a number of biosequences or data-vectors. The composite data point is a new generalization to the concept of the data point from the ordinary definition (e.g., a biosequence or a data-vector). In case of visualizing a composite data point using window-based mechanism, few technical problems arise in this context. In this paper, we shall address those technical problems and provide insights about the window-based mechanism visualization approach. In the next part of this section we shall present a summary of recent related research work. We will focus on the research achievements in the area of alignment-free sequence analysis.
Alignment-free sequence analysis is a developing research area [1, 2], and recent years have shown this scientific fact clearly. Alignment-free sequence analysis algorithms (AFSAA) have several strengths compared with alignment-based sequence analysis algorithms (ABSAA). First, AFSAA can be used to map sequences into feature space as data-vectors; therefore, several algorithms, techniques, and approaches in data mining, machine learning, and statistical computing can be implemented effectively to analyze data-vectors that are extracted from sequences in feature space. Second, AFSAA are computationally less expansive compared with ABSAA [3]. AFSAA are window-based algorithms. Those algorithms are applicable to any sequences [3] without any prior assumption about degrees of dissimilarities; in other words, prior knowledge about homology assumption is not required. Moreover, AFSAA can be used when ABSAA are inapplicable.
Daoud [4] proposed an alignment-free sequence analysis technique to measure the distance between two unaligned biosequences. The technique has the capacity to measure the distance between two sliding segmented windows. Quantum of distance values are concluded after sliding a segmented window on the longest sequence from left-end to right-end. The whole shortest sequence is considered as another static segmented window. The distance distribution is used to analyze the quantum of distance-values. The membership value of a given query sequence with respect to different classes can be estimated using stochastic approximation, and without assuming any prior stochastic assumptions.
Pham and Zuegg [5] proposed an alignment-free probabilistic measure to measure the distance between two unaligned sequences. Precisely, the probabilistic measure is defined to measure the distance between two estimated Markovian models, where each Markovian model represents a sequence. The research addressed the problems of alignment based-algorithms in terms of aligning sequences with low similarity rates and the time complexity to accomplish the required computational process.
Borozan et al. [6] proposed another approach to improve the classification outcomes of sequence comparison by combining alignment-free and alignment-based measures to obtain similarity scores as discriminatory information about sequences.
Vinga and Almeida [7] reviewed the majority of overwhelming alignment-free sequence comparison algorithms. The paper classified those algorithms into two categories. The first category is defined in terms of the frequency distribution of n-grams and the distance/similarity measures are defined in a feature space (Cartesian space). In this context, the data-vectors are the frequency vectors of n-grams. The second category is based on the implementation of Kolmogorov complexity and Chaos Theory.
The structure of this paper can be summarized as follows: we present the proposed method in section II; experiments and discussions are presented in section III; and finally, the conclusion and the expected future work are presented in section IV.