On November 22, 2013, the US FDA sent a warning letter to 23andMe, Inc. and ordered the company to immediately cease marketing of their Saliva Collection Kit and PGS until it received proper marketing authorization for the device [1]. This letter was sent after the firm failed to provide additional information on the analytical and clinical validity of the PGS the FDA requested. It said that although the FDA has been diligently working to help the company comply with regulatory requirements since July 2009, it stopped communicating with the FDA since May. Apparently making matters worse, the company initiated new marketing campaigns, including TV commercials. This made the FDA conclude that the company intends to expand the PGS's uses and consumer base without obtaining marketing authorization from the agency [2]. The FDA clearly stated that their PGS requires marketing approval, because it is intended for use "in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, or is intended to affect the structure or function of the body." In other words, the FDA considers the PGS an unclassified medical device, which requires premarket approval or de novo classification [1].
After receiving the letter, on November 26, 2014, Wojcicki acknowledged in a blog post that they were behind schedule with their responses to the FDA and that the agency needs to be convinced of the quality of their PGS data. On December 5, 2013, the company announced that it would suspend its health-related genetic tests to comply with the US FDA's directive during the regulatory review process [13]. Based on the letter, the FDA does not seem to think that the analytical validity of 23andMe's SNP genotyping is a problem per se as far as its results are correct but feels that the clinical validity of risk estimation has yet to be validated, which may be practically impossible. After that, 23andMe announced that it has been working with the FDA, and the agency seemed to consider the firm's response to be adequate [14]. However, the firm is not able to provide any timeline for resuming their PGS.