Cancer cells often demonstrate resistance to IR, fail to arrest the cell cycle to repair DNA damage, and continue to proliferate under genotoxic stress [10]. Therefore, it is very important to understand radioresistance as well as enhanced invasiveness for RT.
In the present study, we established radioresistant NSCLC H460 cells by fractionated low-dose IR and evaluated their response to IR. Identification of DEGs related to DNA damage, cell growth, and ECM compared with parental cells in radioresistant lung cancer cells that have been developed by fractionated IR has been reported [23, 27]. IR induces autophagy and the formation of acidic vesicular organelles in cancer cells [22]. We also found that H460R cells had a distinct morphology, with enhanced cell scattering and an increase in acidic vesicular organelles. Low-dose IR has been shown to induce changes in the cellular microenvironment, leading to mesenchymal changes, and to significantly enhance the ability of migration and invasion in breast cancer cells [28]. Differentiation pathways have been involved in radioresistance as well as chemoresistance [29]. For example, Wnt/beta-catenin mediates radiation resistance [3, 30]. Some of these genes may be responsible for the emergence of resistance to therapy-for example, MMPs [31]. We also observed that radioresistant H460R cells exhibited increased activities of migration and representative MMPs, including MMP2 and MMP9, compared with parental cells. Our findings are consistent with recent studies showing that MMPs are able to control metastasis [2, 15, 32]. In addition, expression of β-catenin appeared in radioresistant cells but not in parental cells. Based on our observation of rare expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin, β-catenin might play an important role in radioresistant H460R cells. Our findings suggest that H460R cells might have the potential for invasion and metastasis, which will be elucidated in a future study. H460 cells with wild-type p53 responded with a shorter G2/M phase, leading to increased apoptosis compared with radioresistant H460R cells. Results from flow cytometry correlated with a series of Western blot data. Expression levels of XIAP decreased in the parental cells but increased in H460R cells. Expression patterns of GRP78 and GRP94 in H460R cells were different from those of parental cells. Strongly increased CHOP protein levels in H460 cells after 8 h by IR, but not in H460R cells, were consistent with a previous study showing that CHOP-deficient cells have enhanced survival when challenged with toxins that induce ER stress [14]. These data suggest that H460R cells are altered in response to IR-induced ER stress as well as DNA damage.
In this study, SNTB2 increased after IR exposure, and knockdown of SNTB2 led to an increase in sensitivity in both H460 and H460R cells in response to IR. However, the effect of si-SNTB2 on H460R was less compared with the parental cells. H460R cells can be considered to be genetically more heterogeneous in response to repeated IR. In fact, we observed that si-SNTB2 did not sufficiently knock down SNTB2 levels in H460R cells compared with the parental cells, based on data from the Western blot analysis. Hence, we alternatively utilized IR-resistant H1299 cells to confirm that SNTB2 is involved in radioresistance. H1299 cells, which express endogenously high SNTB2 levels and are radioresistant, were more sensitive to IR exposure when SNTB2 was down-regulated by siRNA. This suggests that overexpression of SNTB2 is linked to radioresistance in H1299 as well as H460R cells, implying that SNTB2 plays a critical role in the radioresistance of cancer cells. We are planning to explore the gain of function by SNTB2 using its ectopic overexpression in a further study and to clarify how SNTB2 plays a role in radioresistance.
In summary, we established H460R-radioresistant cells by fractionated low-dose IR and showed that these cells exhibit not only morphological changes but also a differential response to IR at the molecular level compared with parental cells. Among DEGs, SNTB2 played a role in radioresistance. Therefore, H460R cells will be helpful as an in vitro cellular model of radioresistance to evaluate its mechanism and to develop drugs to overcome radioresistance occurring during RT.