There has been an explosion of data describing genetic variants in humans. Structural genetic variations, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variations (CNVs), have given rise to myriad differences in human populations [1]. The study of human genetic variations has both evolutionary significance and medical applications and can help scientists understand ancient human population migrations as well as how different human groups are biologically related to one another [2, 3]. SNPs represent the most frequent type of human DNA variation [4]. The main goals of SNP research include understanding the genetics of the human phenotype variation and, especially, the genetic basis of human diseases [5, 6]. Genome-wide linkage and association studies have been made possible by highly accurate methods for typing SNPs [7]. CNV is a form of genomic structural variation that results in the cell having an abnormal number of copies of one or more sections of DNA [8]. CNVs can be limited to a single gene or include a contiguous set of genes. CNVs can result in having either too many or too few dosage-sensitive genes, which may be responsible for a substantial amount of human phenotypic variability, complex behavioral, traits and disease susceptibility [9]. A copy number polymorphism (CNP) is a CNV that occurs in more than 1% of the population [10]. SNP platforms can also be used for typing CNVs. This allows for generalized genotyping of both SNPs and CNVs simultaneously on a common sample set, with advantages in terms of cost and unified analysis. Although CNP detection from SNP genotyping data is a difficult task and has the limitation of false positive results, it will provide a more comprehensive view of genomic variations and complement genome-wide association studies in identifying disease susceptibility loci.
SNPs are being used in studies of human migration and evolution, as well as those of human health. The Human Genome Organization (HUGO) Pan-Asian SNP Consortium reported a large-scale survey of autosomal variations from a broad geographic sample of 72 Asian human populations [11]. The study indicated that most populations show relatedness within ethnic or linguistic groups, despite significant gene flow among groups. This relatedness may have important implications for our understanding of genetics and disease. Data on ethnic populations in the Pan-Asia region can be valuable to show the spectrum of genetic diversity and networks of ethnic groups. Thus, notwithstanding the population size problem in some ethnic groups, we investigated the ethnic specificity based on SNP and CNP information. Here, we identified genetic variations-ethnically specific SNPs (ESNPs) and ethnically specific CNPs (ECNPs)-of Asian populations using SNP genotypic profiling. These ESNP and ECNP markers can be used to identify genetic differences and to predict disease susceptibility and drug effectiveness in Asian populations.