Medication adherence averages only 50% among patients receiving treatment for chronic diseases. Poor medication adherence contributes to worsening disease, death, and increased health care costs. Moreover, if medication adherence is not guaranteed, new therapeutic options, such as personalized medicine that aims to customize healthcare to individual patients based on their genetic background, are merely useless [16]. However, in spite of its importance in personal and social aspects, the genetic background for medication adherence has never been studied. Since personality traits that have a genetic background affect behaviors, including medication non-adherence, this study aimed to explore the genetic basis of medication adherence in chronic diseases for the first time.
Among the hypertensive or diabetic patients from the KARE cohort study, 235 medication non-adherent individuals (case) and 1,067 medication adherent individuals (control) were extracted according to the self-reported treatment status for the disease from the cohort questionnaire. Patient self-reports are considered a simple and effective method to measure adherence, since a gold standard does not exist [1]. Patients with cognitive impairments that can affect adherence were excluded. Defining rigorous phenotype criteria is paramount to the success of a case-control GWAS [17]. Thus, the method of classifying individuals as either case or control in this study was validated by comparing the general characteristics of the case-control subjects. The differences in demographic factors (age and gender) and disease factors for adherence between the two groups were consistent with previous reports (Table 1) [3].
Nevertheless, the classification criteria in this study have limitations. First, there is the possibility of misclassification of treatment-adherent individuals as medication non-adherent patients, because the criteria were based exclusively on current medication status for hypertension or diabetes. For example, patients with mild hypertension or diabetes who follow instructions from the physician to modify their diet or lifestyle as an initial therapy can be classified as medication non-adherent individuals. Second, the different ratio of the number of hypertensive and diabetic patients between the case and control groups can affect the GWAS results [18]. Additionally, the risk of volunteer bias is present, in which individuals who participated in the KARE cohort possibly tended to adhere more to health care services. To overcome these limitations, standardized phenotype criteria for self-reported adherence, such as the five-item Medication Adherence Report Scale-MARS-5, which has already been used in various settings [19], and the eight-item Morisky Medication Adherence Scale-MMAS-8, which has been validated in over 1,000 individuals with hypertension [20], can be applied in the study design. These criteria enable reliable and replicable classification of medication adherence [17].
This study identified four loci that were suggestively associated with medication adherence. The most significantly associated SNP was rs6978712 (p = 4.87 × 10-7), which is located nearby the GCC1 gene on chromosome 7. Two suggestive SNPs were in strong linkage disequilibrium (r2 > 0.8) with rs6978712 (Fig. 3). This might be due to the close physical proximity of those three SNPs. GCC1 encodes a peripheral membrane protein that may have a role in the organization of the trans-Golgi network subcompartment that is associated with membrane transport [21]. The trans-Golgi network is a major secretory pathway that sorts and directs newly synthesized proteins to subcellular destinations, including neuronal synapses. Increased transcription of GCC1 in the brain cortex of drug abusers has been reported in one study [15]. This study indicates that GCC1 is involved in decision-making capabilities in drug abusers. Patients with chronic diseases weigh the benefits from adherence with treatment against the constraints on their daily lives and the perceived risks of treatment, such as side effects, time, money, and effort involved, either consciously or subconsciously [3]. Thus, in the aspect of decision-making in adherence behavior, the association between medication adherence and the three SNPs proximal to the GCC1 gene identified in this study seems worthy of further research. The personality trait-associated SNPs were not associated with medication adherence in this study. Because of the multivariate association between personality traits and medication adherence, it seems difficult to apply the personality trait-associated SNPs to the medication adherence-associated SNPs directly.
This study suggests potential evidence for a genetic basis of medication adherence in chronic disease patients. A complete identification of the genetic influences for medication adherence appears feasible, because medication adherence is complexly influenced by not only personality traits but also many factors, including socio-economic factors, healthcare-related factors, and demographic factors [3]. Nevertheless, identifying genetic associations for poor medication adherence in chronic disease patients requires further research. It would be helpful for physicians to initiate personalized medication therapy by modifying treatment strategies, such as changing the route of administration, the complexity of treatment, and the degree of behavioral change required, for chronic disease patients with expected poor medication adherence from their genetic background.