The Peg3 domain displays unique features and also shares several features with the other imprinted domains. First, the domain structure has been well preserved during mammalian evolution, as seen in the other domains. This makes sense with the prediction that the imprinting and transcription of the Peg3 domain are likely controlled, as a group, through a shared cis regulatory element-in this case, the Peg3-DMR. As part of the conserved genomic interval, many ECRs are found to be localized within the middle 250-kb region and are also predicted to be enhancers for individual imprinted genes within the Peg3 domain (Fig. 1). Coordinating these potential enhancers with individual promoters may be needed, since some of these ECRs are likely to be shared among individual imprinted genes. As an ICR, the Peg3-DMR might be responsible for this coordinating task. According to a situation observed in the H19/Igf2-imprinted domain, its ICR functions as an enhancer blocker through another transcription factor, CTCF, controlling the accessibility of a shared enhancer between H19 and Igf2 [1, 2]. Interestingly, the ICR of the H19/Igf2 domain also has an unusual cluster of CTCF binding sites, which is very similar to the localization of a tandem array of multiple YY1 binding sites within the Peg3-DMR [52]. Although both ICRs are similar in many ways, their roles as ICRs are likely different from each other. This prediction is based on the result that YY1 and YY1 binding sites do not display enhancer-blocking activity [53]. One plausible role for YY1 might be 'linking' or 'tethering' long-distance enhancers to the corresponding target promoters [54]. As described earlier, ECR18 interacts with the bidirectional promoter of Peg3/Usp29. This long-distance interaction, or linking, between ECR18 and the bidirectional promoter may be mediated through the YY1/YY1-binding sites within the Peg3-DMR (Fig. 2). A similar scenario is also possible for the other ECRs found within the Peg3 domain, which warrants a series of systematic and careful investigations in the near future. Overall, as seen in other domains, the conserved genomic structure of the Peg3 domain makes sense with the presence of co-regulation through the Peg3-DMR, but the mechanisms governing the Peg3 domain by this ICR are likely to be unique, based on the involvement of the transcription factor YY1.
Second, the overall functional outcomes of the Peg3 domain are similar to those observed from other domains, such as controlling fetal growth rates and maternal-caring behaviors [27, 28, 35]. In particular, this has been consistently demonstrated through functional studies of the Peg3 locus [29, 32]. Despite these similar outcomes at the organismal level, the potential function of each imprinted gene is likely to be unique at the molecular and cellular levels. For instance, Peg3 codes for a DNA-binding protein with repression activity at the molecular level and inhibits cell growth as a tumor suppressor at the cellular level. Yet, Peg3 is regarded as a growth stimulator at the organismal level, since the down-regulation of Peg3 usually results in reduction in body size. The functional outcomes of Peg3 seem to be somewhat contradictory between the cellular and organismal levels. This is quite unique compared to other imprinted genes encoding proteins with different biochemical properties, such as paternally expressed insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) and maternally expressed insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (Igf2r). The phenotypic outcomes of this pair of ligand and receptor are overall similar at the cellular and organismal levels [27, 28]. Igf2 stimulates cell growth, and thus, higher levels of Igf2 result in bigger body size. Igf2r derives exactly the opposite phenotypes to those of Igf2, inhibiting cell growth, and thus, more Igf2r results in smaller body size. As proposed earlier, the conflicting phenotypes of Peg3 at the cellular and organismal levels could be explained in the following manner [55]. Peg3 might be involved in programmed cell death during the development of neuron cells-specifically, a set of neuron cells producing growth suppressors. The absence of Peg3 could result in the overgrowth of these neuron cells with an excessive amount of growth suppressors at the cellular level, causing smaller body size at the organismal level. Although this remains to be tested, it is feasible, since many imprinted genes are highly expressed in the neuroendocrine system, such as the hypothalamus, which is responsible for controlling body size through growth hormones [31]. In that regard, it is interesting to note that another paternally expressed DNA-binding gene, Zac1 (zinc finger protein regulating apoptosis and cell cycle arrest), also shows similar conflicting outcomes-it is a growth suppressor at the cellular level but a growth stimulator at the organismal level [56, 57]. Since both Peg3 and Zac1 are growth suppressors at the cellular level, these genes have been quite often identified as tumor suppressors. Although the overall functional contributions by the Peg3 domain are similar to those of other domains at the organismal level, the detailed function of each imprinted gene is predicted to be unique at the cellular and molecular levels.
Third, the Peg3 domain also contains several ncRNA genes, as seen in other imprinted domains. These ncRNA genes include Zim2, Zim3, and Zfp264 in the rodent lineage (Fig. 1). These ncRNA genes are unique due to the following reasons. First, these ncRNA genes are of relatively recent evolutionary origin, so that their ancestral genes can be identified easily through sequence similarity to their corresponding protein-coding sequences. It is currently unknown whether these ncRNA genes are in the process of becoming pseudogenes or have already adapted as ncRNA genes with some functions. Regardless, they have maintained their transcriptional activity for quite a long time, given the accumulation of mutations disrupting their ORFs, suggesting that their gene products, ncRNA, or transcription itself is now part of the Peg3 domain. If some of them have already adapted as ncRNA genes, examining their sequences should provide some clues regarding how protein-coding sequences become ncRNA genes during evolution. Thus, the ncRNA genes of the Peg3 domain might provide a very unique opportunity to understand the evolutionary paths of mammalian genes. In that regard, it is relevant to note that mammalian X chromosome inactivation-specific transcript (Xist) represents another well-known case where a proteincoding gene has become an ncRNA gene [58]. Second, some functions of these ncRNA genes should be lineage-specific to rodents, since the original genes of these ncRNA genes are still protein-coding genes in all other mammals. This level of lineage-specific change has not been observed from other imprinted domains. This might be related to the fact that the Peg3 domain has been part of a large zinc finger gene family, which is known to be vulnerable to genomic rearrangements, including deletion and duplication [14]. Also, the functional redundancy afforded by the zinc finger gene family might have allowed its members to drift away from their proteincoding sequences without severe phenotypic consequences. Overall, the structurally conserved genomic interval of the Peg3 domain might have allowed several protein-coding members to adapt into ncRNA genes, which seems to be quite different from the evolutionary patterns observed from other imprinted domains.