With the development of genotyping technologies, many disease-related genetic variants have been verified by genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Diagnosis and disease risk prediction from the utilization of the genetic variants have improved even further [1]. Direct-to-consumer genetic companies, such as 23andME (http://www.23andme.com/) and Pathway Genomics (https://www.pathway.com/), provide personal genome information services. For example, the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes play important roles in breast cancer diagnosis and clinical treatment [23]. While several disease prediction studies have been conducted using disease-related genetic variants, there are some limitations to disease risk prediction. It becomes difficult to construct a disease risk prediction model, because there are typically a larger number of genetic variants than the number of individuals in the “large p small n” problem. Also, the effect size of genetic variants for most complex human diseases is small, and missing heritability exists [4]. Moreover, some loss of statistical power to identify significant associations is caused by the correlating single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) [5]. Multicollinearity due to high LD among SNPs causes high variance of coefficient estimates. In order to solve these issues, various statistical approaches have been recently proposed.
Initially, a gene score (GS) was computed using statistical models for disease risk prediction [678]. These risk prediction models were created from GSs by summing up the marginal effect of each disease-associated genetic variant. Several studies have shown that GS is useful for risk prediction [9]. However, the accuracy of the risk prediction is poor when joint effects exist between multiple genetic variants [1011].
Building a risk prediction model using multiple SNPs is an effective way to improve disease risk prediction. Multiple logistic regression (MLR) is one of the typical traditional approaches. Several studies have shown the usefulness of an MLR-based approach for creating disease risk prediction models [121314]. However, the parameter estimation of MLR becomes unstable, and the predictive power of the risk prediction model decreases if there is high LD among SNPs.
In order to solve the “large p and small n” problem, many penalized regression approaches, like ridge [151617], least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) [18], and Elastic-Net (EN) [19], have been proposed. For highdimensional data, these penalized approaches have several advantages in variable selection, as well as in prediction, over non-penalized approaches. For example, several researchers showed that the utilization of a large amount of SNPs with penalized regression approaches improves the accuracy of Crohn's disease and bipolar disorder risk prediction [2021].
It is important to build a risk prediction model that pertains to discrete variables, such as disease diagnosis. It is also important to make predictions based on continuous variables, such as human health-related outcomes. When using medicines to treat diseases, we can use genetic information to calculate the dosage, in addition to basic physical information, such as height and weight. For example, there is a prediction model for warfarin responsiveness that was made with multivariate linear regression [22]. We can apply such a model directly to disease treatment.
In this study, we focus on the prediction of quantitative traits using common genetic variants. We systematically compared the performance of prediction models through real data from the Korea Association Resource (KARE). We first selected the prediction variables using statistical methods, such as stepwise linear regression (SLR), LASSO, and EN. We then constructed commonly used risk prediction models, such as SLR, LASSO, and EN. Finally, we compared the predictive accuracy by calculating the mean square error (MSE) value for predicting body mass index (BMI). Overall, our results show that LASSO and SLR provide the smallest MSE value among the compared methods.