As technology for pathogen detection has developed from culture method to next-generation sequencing, our knowledge about bacterial community structure and its influence on human health and disease is developing rapidly [27, 28]. Today, the advanced technology is helping bring to light uterine microbiota associated with metritis in dairy cows. An early study using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and 16S rRNA gene clone library sequencing determined that Fusobacteria was found to be more dominant in the metritic cows, and Gammaproteobacteria more dominant in healthy cows [19]. Another study examined the abundance and diversity of uterine microbiota in healthy and metritic cows using the clone library sequencing of 16S rRNA gene and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis, and found that of all bacteria, Bacteroidetes, Peptostreptococcus, and Fusobacterium were more abundant in metritic cows than in healthy cows on 10 days postpartum (DPP) [21]. Furthermore, metagenomic pyrosequencing allowed the comparison of relative abundance of each bacteria in samples from metritic and non-metritic cows, where Bacteroides spp. and Ureaplasma spp. were found to be associated with metritis [20]. In this study Odoribacter spp., Peptoniphilus spp. and Helcococcus spp. were reported to be associated with uterine health and reproductive performance. However, it should be noted that they collected samples on 35 ± 3 DPP after the metritis was resolved. Considering dynamic changes of uterine microbiota [22, 23, 25], it is difficult to conclude that these bacteria identified on 35 ± 3 DPP contributed to metritis. In short, early metagenomic studies using clone library sequencing and pyrosequencing enabled the discovery of diverse and abundant uterine microbiota of dairy cows, pointing out the difference in bacterial community structure between healthy and metritic cows. However, these studies were unable to define specific uterine microbiota associated with metritis due to the lack of statistical power and technical limit of detection.
To determine specific uterine microbiota associated with metritis, Jeon et al. [23] investigated uterine microbiota progression from calving (0 DPP) until establishment of metritis (6 ± 2 DPP) using Illumina sequencing of 16S rRNA genes. They observed that uterine microbiota structure was identical between cows that developed metritis and healthy cows until 2 DPP, when the bacterial structure deviated in favor of greater relative abundance of Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium in metritic cows. Notably, relative abundance of Bacteroides appeared to be significantly higher in metric cows than in healthy cows at 6 ± 2 DPP. Similar findings have been reported in other studies that used different types of samples and techniques [25, 26, 29]. In addition, cows that cured metritis either naturally or with antibiotic treatment displayed a decrease in abundance of Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium [24]. Considering all the literature in Table 1, it is reasonable to conclude that Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium play a key role in development of metritis. At the same time, it was not clear which bacteria were associated with uterine health due to individual variation of uterine microbiota, but healthy or cured cows appeared to harbor more diverse uterine microbiota [22, 23, 29].