The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is a eukaryotic model organism that has become useful in studies of the cell cycle and chromosome dynamics [1]. According to a phylogenic tree, fission yeast is separated from the other model yeast—the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae—by an estimated 1,000 million years of evolution [2]. Fission yeast has the smallest genome among eukaryotes, with a haploid genome size of 13.8 Mb, covering ∼5,000 open reading frames (ORFs) compared with ＞5,500 for budding yeast [3]. Like budding yeast, fission yeast is also genetically tractable. Its popularity in studying mammalian cell biology has led to its nickname, “micro-mammal.”
Genomics has benefited from innovative advances in the field of genetic engineering. Especially, genomewide gene deletion allows the qualitative and quantitative functional analysis of genes en masse. The budding yeast is the pioneer model organism for gene deletion collections, facilitating feasible parallel growth analyses [4]. Next to the budding yeast gene deletion library, the fission yeast gene deletion library has been reported by our team [5], supplying powerful resources for cell cycle and cell shape genes [6]. The fission yeast gene deletion library was constructed using a similar strategy to the one used in budding yeast. In brief, for each strain, the ORF was replaced and tagged by homologous recombination with a deletion cassette. Each correct deletion strain was confirmed by at least one successful colony PCR out of a pair of colony PCRs from both ends of deletion cassettes. In addition, a pair of unique barcode tags was built on each deletion strain to enable the identification of genes that are affected by specific growth conditions without prior knowledge of gene function [7]. For example, the growth fitness of each strain under a chemical treatment can be measured in a highly parallel manner [8].
However, its extensive usage combined with microarray has been hampered by the high rate of mutations in barcode regions that are introduced during strain construction. According to a previous analysis of barcode sequences in budding yeast, at least 18% to 31% of the genome-integrated barcodes contain differences from those originally synthesized, depending on the sequencing method [9, 10]. Also, in a preliminary study, the fission yeast deletion library has been reported to contain ∼30% mutations in barcode sequences [11]. These mutations cause problems of anomalous hybridization during microarray, resulting in false positive signals. Supposing only a 1% hybridization error, there exist ＞50 false-positives among ∼5,000 ORF genes in fission yeast. To circumvent the problem caused by barcode mutations, next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has been applied to replace the microarray method [10]. No internal mutations in barcode regions matter, because the innovative NGS protocol directly counts each barcode in a complex sample via genomic deep sequencing. For adaptation of the NGS technology, a prerequisite is to characterize the entire sequences of all barcodes.
In the study, for the first time, we assessed the prevalence of mutations of all genome-incorporated barcodes in the fission yeast deletion library by Sanger sequencing. The results in this work, combined with the NGS platform, promise to harness the fission yeast gene deletion library for understanding gene function.