To nullify the 2,643 proteins from total 4,630 redundant proteins of F. nucleatum stain ATCC 25586 the CD-HIT program used at 60% identity [3536]. After BLASTP analysis, human non-homologous proteins were selected to avoid unwanted cross-reactions and cytotoxicity. BLASTP against DEG identified the essential genes. The genes that are vital to maintain cellular life are referred to as essential genes. Essential gene products of pathogen can become promising novel drug targets owing to the reason that most antibiotics attack cellular processes in bacteria [3237]. Essential genes which are exclusive to an organism can be regarded as species-specific therapeutic targets [33].
Sub-cellular localization of proteins has an important role in drug targets prediction arena. Proteins situated in cytoplasmic membrane are considered more valuable for target site.
3D structure of protein molecules exposes the molecular basis of protein function and thus allows an efficient design of experiments, for example, site-directed mutagenesis, disease-related mutation analysis, or the structure based design of specific inhibitors [38]. That is why, the determination of the 3D structure of a protein molecule is central to its understanding and manipulation of biochemical and cellular functions [39].
In case of each protein, greater than 90% confidence match was obtained except PTS system fructose-specific IIABC component protein. A high confidence match indicates that, overall fold of the models were almost accurate and the central core of the model was correct as well [34].
Ramachandran plot statistics of phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase showed that most of the amino acid residues (above 90% of amino acid residues) were found in most favoured regions indicating that the protein models were of very good quality.
The program functions based on the analysis of statistics of non-bonded interactions between different atom types [40]. Verify 3D graph and a value of 0.85 of phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase in contrast to the value 0.72 for N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase indicates that environmental profile phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase is fairly good [4142]. The QMEAN assesses the global quality of the models based on a linear combination of six structural descriptions. The local geometry model is analyzed by calculating torsion angel potential over three consecutive amino acids. The long range interactions are assessed by estimating secondary structure specific distance dependent pairwise residue level potential. A solvation potential reveals the burial state of the residues. Simple sequence editor and auto cross covariance conformity indicates that the assessment between the predicted and calculated secondary structure and solvent accessibility is of good quality [434445].
Specifying exact ligand-binding site on protein is a crucial step in rational designing of novel therapeutic molecules to modulate the protein functions [46]. TM-SITE and S-SITE, along with considering COFACTOR, FINDSITE, and CONCAVITY results which increases Matthews correlation coefficient by 15% over the best individual predictions and these predictions are considered reliable and accurate in recent times [47].
Moreover, pharmaco-chemical properties of the PPR and SKP that were retrieved from the DrugBank Database indicate that these compounds are non-carcinogenic, non-toxic and moderately absorbable by human intestine (absorption probability, 0.7197 and 0.5233, respectively) [48]. Hence, the activity of the phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase can be inhibited by the PPR, derivatives of PPR or PPR related compounds. Likewise, the activity of the N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase probably can be hindered by SKP, derivatives of SKP or SKP related molecules. Since, phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase and N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyltransferase were identified as the essential proteins for the bacterial survival, blocking the function of these two enzymes can be a novel way to treat F. nucleatum–associated diseases. However, further research should be conducted both in vivo and in vitro to ascertain this result.
Understanding the docking studies with phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase, PTS system fructose-specific IIABC component, and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 1-carboxyvinyl transferase protein as a receptor and protoporphyrin IX as a ligand. Analysis of the lowest docked energy value, the involvement of H-bonds, calculated root mean square deviation value, and interacting residues was considered [49].
The interactions between the amino acid residues in active sites and the ligand molecules derived in this study would be valuable to understand the potential mechanism of residues and the drug binding. It is evident that that protoporphyrin IX is involved in similar hydrogen bond interactions with proteins and thus the results found in our study are significant. However, to consider these proteins as valid target for drug designing, the future researchers also need to think about the possibility that these same functional proteins may exist in some other beneficial bacteria from human microbiota.
In conclusion, in this era of genomic science, subtractive genomic approach to drug designing has been greatly facilitated by the plethora of bacterial genomic information. The demand for new classes of antibacterial drug is increasingly growing as drug resistance challenges the effectiveness of existing therapies. Hence, there are obvious benefits for the identification and evaluation of new therapeutic targets and which is why this study has scrutinized the proteome of oral pathogen F. nucleatum adopting the subtractive genomic approach and identified two promising novel therapeutic targets along with predicting their 3D structures, ligand binding sites and corresponding ligands as well. These findings have now paved the way for design and development of novel inhibitors for F. nucleatum using the structure based drug design strategy.