This study was the first report of a KLF5 SNP (rs3782933) involved in the susceptibility to BMR in Korean elementary school children. Children with the TT genotype had significantly higher BMR, muscle, HLD-C, insulin, and C-peptide and lower LDL-C than those with the wild-type CC. However, we found that BMI, muscle, and fat mass could explain the usual increase in BMR in every genotype in KLF5, whereas insulin and C-peptide were not associated with the increase of BMR, except wild-type, in the linear regression analysis. Using multiple linear regression analysis, we estimated the predicting equation of BMR in children. In the high-BMR group, TT genotype increased BMR according to muscle, fat mass, and C-peptide, and there was an inverse correlation between BMR and RI (adjust r2 = 1.000, p < 0.001). Our results suggested an association between the TT mutant homozygotes of KLF5 rs3782933 and BMR in Korean children.
BMR is affected by many factors, such as age, gender, body composition, and genetic variation. BMR measurement in humans was primarily used for the diagnosis of hypo- and hyperthyroidism. Recently, BMR was used to estimate human energy and food requirements as well as the diagnosis of thyroid disease, diabetes, and leukemia [21]. Up to the present, alleles of specific genes, such as UCP1, LPL, and beta3-AR, were considered to play a major role in the development of metabolic complications in the obese population [22]. Moreover, some reports suggested that the variation in the beta3-adrenergic receptor gene influences BMR in obese subjects and that the synergistic effect of polymorphisms in UCP1 and beta3-adrenergic receptor genes leads to a lower BMR [15, 23]. Recently, Suchanek et al. [24] investigated the association between an alpha2 Heremans-Schmid glycoprotein (AHSG) gene polymorphism and obesity. There was a significant correlation between homozygotes of AHSG and increased BMR [24]. However, the association of the variation in KLF5 and BMR has not been confirmed yet in Korean children.
Although we identified the novel genetic variation in a noncoding region of KLF5, this SNP might affect complex diseases, such as obesity and diabetes. Many disease-associated mutations are predicted to be SNPs. Some of the SNPs associated with complex diseases might be located in the coding and/or noncoding region and lead to alterations in the function of the protein [25]. Recently, Oishi et al. [1] showed that a novel signaling and transcriptional network involving MEF2A and KLF5 -1,282 bp plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of hypertension and that the KLF5 promoter allele (-1282A) is associated with a higher prevalence of hypertension [1]. KLF5 has also been involved in vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation, growth, and gene expression [3]. In this population, we divided them into two groups by BMI: normal weight and overweight. Children who are overweight have the potential to be obese adults when they grow up. We could infer from the relationship between the KLF5 polymorphism and BMR that the variation of KLF is associated with obesity. Several studies of diverse ethnic groups, including Pima Indians, Caucasians, and Japanese, have demonstrated that obese individuals with type 2 diabetes have a higher BMR compared to the obese non-diabetic populations [26]. In our result, 58% of children in the high-BMR group were overweight, and the children with the TT mutant homozygote of KLF5 came under the high-BMR group.
Recently, the predicting equations for BMR have been verified in many populations [12, 27-29]. To cross-validate three predicting equations for BMR established by the Schofield database, Henry, and Cole, Ramirez-Zea M used mean values for age, weight, height, and BMR. These findings suggested that the equation seemed to be appropriate to estimate BMR in men only, not women [28]. Another study indicated that a new equation may be more appropriate for calculating BMR using age, height, weight, and fat in obese children [27]. In our equation, we determined a BMR equation for children between the ages of 10 and 13 years old based on age, muscle, RI, tricep, WHR, and fat mass. Our predicting equation in children was similar to the previous studies. In the normal-weight group, we observed that the variables of age, weight, muscle, RI, glucose, and insulin were significant predictors of BMR, which accounted for 100% of the variation in BMR. However, the final model of our equation for BMR in the overweight group included both weight and muscle (data not shown). On the other hand, we divided them into 2 groups: low- and high-BMR group. In the high-BMR group, we established the predictive equation using muscle, fat mass, RI, and C-peptide. We observed an inverse correlation between BMR and RI in the high-BMR group, and the children with the TT genotype belonged to the high-BMR group. These results indicated that the children with the TT genotype have a higher BMR compared with the children with the CC genotype.
Although the mean insulin value was higher in the children with the TT genotype than those with the CC genotype, there was no significant association between HOMA-IR and TT genotype in our subjects. We postulated that the relation of insulin and HOMA-IR may contribute to insulin resistance (IR) in our children. IR was calculated according to HOMA using fasting insulin and glucose concentrations [30]. Children who were overweight have a higher morbidity rate of obesity than children with normal weight. Obese adults have more IR than normal, which may predispose them to diabetes [30]. Obesity-induced IR is the major contributor of metabolic syndrome, and both obesity and IR are components of metabolic syndrome [31, 32]. However, we could not observe IR. Also, the insulin value and HOMA-IR were not involved in the equation of the overweight group. In the high-BMR group only, we observed that the higher C-peptide affected the increase of BMR in children with the TT genotype. Therefore, obese children with the TT genotype may have no potential for becoming obese adults with metabolic syndrome.
There are several limitations in this study. First of all, a sample size of this study was too small, because 1) it was necessary to use a direct calorimeter for measuring RMR, but the device and its expendables, such as mouthpieces, were too expensive and not cost-effective for our study. If the children were unable to reach steady-state oxygen consumption in the allotted time of approximately 10 min, the children repeated numerous times after resting, and it was not easy for younger participants. 2) Parent's signed permission for these children was mandatory at the first visit, but several parents and children rejected informed consent. 3) It was not sufficient to obtain the blood samples of all children for analyzing the genetic polymorphism of KLF5, and there was a genotyping error sometimes. Second, we could not find out the citations to explain the association between the KLF5 polymorphism and BMR. There is abundant satisfactory research showing the predictive equation for BMR in several populations. Although we discovered the studies to suggest the genes involved in the regulation of energy expenditure metabolism, including UCP1, there was not enough research to demonstrate the association of KLF5 and BMR in this study.
In this study, we found that the TT homozygote of KLF5 plays a crucial role for increasing BMR and fat mass in Korean children. We could make better use of the novel variations within KLF5 in a future clinical intervention study of obesity.