Several intrinsic biases and limitations including nucleotide composition bias, GC bias and polymerase chain reaction bias can be introduced to RNA-seq data of clinical samples with low quality or quantity. To evaluate the biases from RNA-seq data, several metrics may be examined as following: percentage of exonic or rRNA reads, accuracy and biases in gene expression measurements, GC bias, evenness of coverage, 5'-to-3' coverage bias, and coverage of 5' and 3' ends [6]. Some programs including RNA-SeQC [20], RSeQC [21], and Qualimap 2 [22] are currently available for the purposes, which take typically BAM file as input.
RNA-SeQC [20] provides three types of QC metrics based on read count (total, unique and duplicate reads, rRNA content, strand specificity, etc.), coverage (mean coverage, 5'/3' coverage, GC bias, etc.), and expression correlation (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads [RPKM]–based estimation of expression levels and correlation matrix by all pairwise comparison). The software also provides multisample evaluation regarding library construction protocols, input materials and other experimental parameters.
RSeQC [21] is a Python-based package program that provides several metrics containing sequence quality, GC bias, polymerase chain reaction bias, nucleotide composition bias, sequencing depth, strand specificity, coverage uniformity, and read distribution over the genome structure. Of the metrics, sequencing depth is importance, because it allows users to determine if current RNA-seq data is suitable for such application including expression profiling, alternative splicing analysis, novel isoform identification, and transcriptome reconstruction by checking whether the sequencing depth is saturated or not.
Qualimap 2 [22] is consisted of four analysis modes: BAM QC, Counts QC, RNA-seq QC, and Multi-sample BAM QC. Compared to previous release, this version focuses on multi-sample QC for high-throughput sequencing data. Multi-sample BAM QC mode allows combined QC for multiple alignment files, which takes the metrics from the single-sample BAM QC mode as input. RNA-seq QC mode is added to compute the metrics specific to RNA-seq data, which contains per-transcript coverage, junction sequence distribution, genomic localization of reads, 5'-3' bias and consistency of the library protocol. Counts QC mode enables to estimate the saturation of sequencing depth, read count densities, correlation of samples and distribution of counts among classes of selected features along with gene expression estimation based on NOIseq [23].