We extended our previous study of conditional characterization of the Markov property of publicly available chromatin states by building new Markov models of the active chromatin states.
Table 3 shows average occurrence frequencies of a dominant state of invariant units for the 15 chromatin states. In doing so, we found that some inactive chromatin states were highly constitutive and marked in most of the 127 epigenomes. For example, state 15 (Quiescent state) covered on average 68% of each reference epigenome. Thus, the occurrence frequencies of 15_Quies state for the top 24,000 units were all 124.0 (e.g., chr Y: 13,107,200 to chr1: 13,107,400 units in the bottom of Table 1). This explains the reason why recall of state 15 was relatively high (91.0% in Table 2). The average frequencies for the state three and six were 20.0 and 36.7, respectively. These states are not usually in a dominant state in most of the 200-bp units, and thus are not appropriate for HMM models.
One limitation of our study is that when building HMM models from 200-bp units of DNA sequences, we did not consider whether the unit should be read forward or in reverse, at this time. We just averaged the n-gram counts of both cases when building emission or transition tables.
Another limitation of our study is that the unit length is set at 200 base pairs without exception. The states of HMMs models based on chromatin states can have an explicit length distribution of the sequence emitted in chromatin state. Future HMM models should consider the DNA sequences of states together with emission lengths. Due to the current lack of data availability this is beyond the scope of this paper.
In conclusion, identifying functional regions in the human genome is a major goal in human genetics. N-gram models, including the most notable n-gram model the Hidden Markov model, have been extensively studied in the field of bioinformatics. However, the Markov property of nucleotide sequences associated with chromatin states at whole human genome scale has rarely been reported in the literature. Consequently, little research has been carried out to explore n-gram models associated with whole genome-wide chromatin maps.
It is important to note that we only used DNA sequences contained in epigenetic datasets in modelling Markov chains. Our study showed that some subsets of the invariable chromatin states possessed strong Markov properties. Though our study is preliminary, it is significant in that it has potential to be used to construct statistical models necessary for developing algorithms to predict function directly from sequence when combined with SNPs, motifs, and other resources in future studies.