The 500-kb genomic interval of the Peg3 domain harbors seven imprinted genes: paternally expressed Peg3; Usp29 (ubiquitin-specific hydrolase 29); APeg3 (antisense Peg3); Zfp264 (zinc finger protein 264); and maternally expressed Zim1 (zinc finger gene, imprinted 1), Zim2, and Zim3 (Fig. 1) [8,9,10,11,12]. All of these imprinted genes, except Zim1, are conserved among individual mammalian species. Zim1, however, is found only in mammals with large litter sizes, such as rodents and canines [13]. The order, spacing, and orientation of these imprinted genes are also well conserved between different mammalian species. This is quite unusual, since the Peg3 domain itself is part of a large zinc finger gene family cluster, which is known to go through dynamic genomic changes during evolution. This is even more evident in the genomic regions immediately surrounding the Peg3 domain, which are occupied by two gene families: olfactory receptor and vomeronasal organ receptor. These two gene families show many more frequent lineage-specific expansions and deletions during mammalian evolution, resulting in quite different structures between different species [14]. The changes observed from the surrounding genomic regions are in stark contrast to the structural conservation observed in the Peg3 domain.
Within the 500-kb region of the Peg3 domain, the seven imprinted genes are unevenly distributed: three genes are clustered together on one side, and the remaining four genes are on the other side (Fig. 1). By contrast, the middle 250-kb region is more or less empty, lacking any obvious open reading frame (ORF). Yet, this overall genomic layout is well conserved among all mammals [8]. According to the results from a sequence comparison of several mammalian species, this middle 250-kb region is filled with 20 small genomic fragments, ranging from 100-300 bp in length, that show high levels of sequence conservation between species. These regions, termed evolutionarily conserved regions (ECRs), are likely cis regulatory elements that may be involved in controlling the transcription and imprinting of the Peg3 domain [15]. This prediction has been recently confirmed through the epigenomic results in which the majority of these ECRs is associated with two histone modifications, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac (monomethylation of lysine 4 and acetylation of lysine 27, respectively, of histone 3) [16], which are closely associated with enhancers [17]. The relative positions, spacing, and orientations of these potential cis regulatory elements are also well conserved among all mammals. This large number of potential cis regulatory elements within the 250-kb region hints at one possibility that unknown, but complex, regulatory mechanisms exist to control transcription and imprinting of the Peg3 domain.
Although the 500-kb domain has been structurally well preserved during mammalian evolution, the protein-coding capacity of each imprinted gene has been quite often lost independently in the different lineages of mammals (Fig. 1). For example, three zinc finger genes, Zim2, Zim3, and Zfp264, all have lost their ORFs in the rodent lineage [9, 10]. The current sequences of these genes in rodents have diverged substantially from their original coding sequences, so that they are barely recognizable as zinc finger genes. Thus, these genes may have lost their ORFs quite a long time ago, at the early stages of rodent evolution. Nevertheless, they are still transcriptionally active, indicating that these genes might have functionally adapted as non-coding RNA genes. In fact, one of these genes, Zim3, has become an antisense gene to Usp29: the transcribed regions overlap quite extensively between maternally expressed Zim3 and paternally expressed Usp29. Usp29 also has taken a similar evolutionary path as seen in the three zinc finger genes. In the bovine lineage, the overall sequence structure of Usp29 is still intact, without any major deletions and insertions, but it contains several base substitutions causing STOP codons, indicating that these substitutions likely occurred in recent evolutionary times in the bovine lineage [13]. Interestingly, a similar situation has also been observed in one human population: one substitution causing a STOP codon has been found within the coding region of USP29 (http://browser.1000genomes.org/index.html). So far, Peg3 is the only gene that has maintained its ORF in all lineages of mammals, while the other imprinted genes have lost ORFs in the different lineages of mammals. This suggests that the functions of Peg3 might be the most critical for the survival of mammals as a protein-coding gene. On the other hand, the other members of the Peg3 domain might be less critical for the survival of mammals, which subsequently allows them to have adapted as ncRNA genes during mammalian evolution.