DNA is an excellent medium for archiving data [1]. Recent efforts have illustrated the potential for information storage in DNA. Martin Luther King’s ‘I Have a Dream’ speech and Shakespeare's sonnets have been recorded in DNA [2]. CRISPR-CAS technology has been introduced to store digital information, including digital movies [3]. Recent approaches enable polymerase chain reaction (PCR)‒based random access of stored information with 200 MB of digital data [4].
The principle of recent approaches is top synthesize specific sequences of DNA molecules and sequence them for writing and reading the digital data, respectively. However, both DNA synthesis and sequencing are highly error-prone. Various types of sequence alterations can be found, such as insertions, deletions, and substitutions, at rates of ∼0.01 errors/base [5]. Prior works have shown that a proper encoding scheme is necessary to recover the data under this noisy condition. Thus, existing approaches rely on a high degree of sequencing redundancy (i.e., having many copies of DNA molecules for each sequence and deep sequencing coverage).
Here, we present a new coding scheme for using long-read DNA sequences. Our approach explicitly reduces sequencing redundancy, requiring fewer resources and, in turn, fewer physical copies of any given DNA molecule to recover the stored data. In addition, using long-read DNA in conjunction with nano-pore sequencing technology shortens the sequencing time necessary to recover the information [6].
Our new coding scheme suggests a novel DNA fragment structure for long-read DNA data storage. The structure contains DNA sequences representing a data block, random linker, header, footer, and restriction sites. Because of the design, which contains restriction sites, each DNA fragment will serve as a unit that can be further ligated sequentially to form a longer DNA read. A longer DNA read can store a larger amount of digital information within a single molecule. To validate our scheme, we also provide practical assays to generate longer DNA molecules.
To investigate the challenges using long-read DNA for digital data storage, we encoded the first phrase of “Hun Min Jung Um” (118 characters). The entire information is stored in one long-read DNA sequence (1,872 bp). The read length is longer than previous approaches (150 bp). Our new encoding scheme reduces the sequencing depth required for data recovery (previous approach, 1,308; ours, 15) and sequencing time (previous approach, 3‒4 days; ours, days to 3‒4 h).