In this article, we compared group testing procedures with group lasso selection procedure when high-dimensional genomic data with a group structure are used for case-control genetic association studies. In statistics, hypothesis testing and variable selection are regarded as totally different statistical methods since their objectives are different from each other. Therefore, the comparison of these two statistical approaches has not been studied much. However, in genetic association studies with high-dimensional genomic data, both testing and selection procedures have the same goal which is to identify genes of genetic regions that are associated with either a disease or a trait. Particularly, many types of high-dimensional genomic data consist of multiple groups where each gene or each genetic region contains some genetic sites or variants. So, our research focused on the comparison of group testing procedures and group lasso selection procedure.
In simulation studies, we found that the selection performance of group lasso and group testing procedures could be similar or very different from each other. It depends on data structure such as correlation strength and patterns among genes, the number of causal sites in a gene and noise levels. In real data analysis, it was surprising that group lasso identified many different genes that are not detected by group testing procedures in ovarian cancer association similar or very different from each other. It depends on data structure such as correlation strength and patterns among genes, the number of causal sites in a gene and noise levels. In real data analysis, it was surprising that group lasso identified many different genes that are not detected by group testing procedures in ovarian cancer association studies of DNA methylation data. Although group lasso is known as one of the most commonly used selection methods in statistics when the number of variables is much greater than a sample size, it shows unexpected selection results in ovarian cancer data analysis. In contrast, multiple group testing procedures including PCA, Hotelling's T2 test and permutation test identified almost the same genes associated with ovarian cancer. Since multiple group testing procedures are still the most popular method for medical doctors and geneticists to apply for high-dimensional genomic data with a group structure, we might need to further investigate the validity of group lasso selection procedure in genetic association studies. In future study, our investigation will focus on finding additional reasons that we had many genes detected by group test procedures but missed by group lasso in ovarian cancer data.