Viruses exploit a number of strategies to evade host immune recognition and to facilitate viral replication. Some of these strategies involve viral-derived or endogenous cellular ncRNAs that interact with host immune responses [60].
We have demonstrated that RSV, the most common cause of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in babies, employs a novel mechanism to suppress antiviral responses via induction of some tRFs [561]. We have shown that RSV infection in airway epithelial cells leads to the activation of endonuclease ANG, subsequently inducing abundant production of tRFs, most of which belong to that tRF-5 series. The cleavage sites by ANG are preferentially adjacent to the 5'-end of the anticodon-loop, generating tRF-5 series. These tRF-5s are localized exclusively in the cellular cytoplasm [5]. At least one of the tRFs, namely tRF5-GluCTC (tRF-5 derived from tRNAGlu), has a trans-gene silencing function. Significantly, an antiviral target suppressed by tRF5-GluCTC downregulates RSV replication and significantly decreases the yield of infectious viral particles produced by infected cells, demonstrating a stimulatory role for tRF5-GluCTC in RSV replication [5].
Using an elegant biochemical approach, named HITS-ABt (hIgh-throughput sequencing of RNAs associated with biotinylated tRF), to capture tRF5-GluCTC-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes combined with bioinformatics analysis, we have identified a number of potential cellular mRNA targets of tRF5-GluCTC. One of the candidate mRNAs was shown to be a direct target of tRF5-GluCTC. Mechanistically, tRF5-GluCTC recognizes a target site in the 3'-untranslated region of APOER2 mRNA and suppresses its expression by an unknown mechanism. Further analysis identified a previously unappreciated role for APOER2 protein in antiviral defense against RSV infection [61]. Thus, we have illuminated the roles of tRFs in host–virus interactions and described a novel molecular mechanism for host response regulation via gene targeting at posttranscriptional level, proving a potential therapeutic target to control RSV replication by regulating tRFs induction. As another example of tRFs with a positive effect on viral replication, a tRF-3 derived from tRNAPro (tRF-3019) has been suggested to function as a primer for reverse transcription of human T-cell leukemia virus-1 [62].
The induction of tRFs is virus specific, as human metapneumovirus, a negative-sense single stranded RNA virus belonging to the Paramyxoviridae family [63] and frequent cause for lower respiratory tract infections in young children, immunocompromised patients and older adults [64656667], did not induce tRFs but gradually enhanced the expression percentage of miRNAs in a time-dependent fashion [6]. The involvement of tRFs in infectious diseases suggests that tRFs may be targets for the development of new drugs to control viral replication.