The seed region usually has six nucleotides which affects the most important elements for recognizing and combining 3´ UTR regions [25]. To observe the relationship of evolutionary conservation about these miRNAs, we analyzed those sequences using ECR browser system and genomic approach, indicating that seed region was highly conserved from fish to primates (Figs. 1 and 2). These data allow us to understanding miRNA functional research among those species [26]. In the previously study, miR-21-3p sequence (5´-CAACACCAGUCGAUGGGCUGU-3´) was predicted seed region as 5´-AACACCA-3´ and matched with 7mer of target mRNA 3´ UTR region. Also, miR-21-3p has the potential target gene, FZD4 and it is positively correlated to synergetic reaction about target mRNA silencing activity [27]. In the present study, we found seed region as 6mer 5´-CAGUCG-3´ via miRbase and evolutionary conservation related programs. Then, the sequences were confirmed by using mfold web server (Fig. 3). All target mRNAs of the miR-21-3p by PANTHER program allow us to understand their biological functions. Therefore, we examined GO analysis, showing that most of the target mRNAs seem to be associated with cellular process, cellular metabolic process, catalytic/binding activity, and cell part component (Fig. 4). In the previous study, GO enrichment in the genes noted serious enhancement for target mRNAs. These targets were related to the defense response, inflammatory response, and immunological reactions, which the result revealed nuclear factor-kB signaling pathway by using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway program [28]. Also, the possible regulatory pathways for the miR-21-3p at major target genes were analyzed by KEGG terms. GO categories were related to metabolic process, cell growth, cell cycle process, cell division, and signal transmission [29]. In order to understand the relationship between target gene and miRNAs, target genes were predicted from miRNA target prediction programs [30] and then selected 3´ UTR of the genes which have binding site to seed region of miR-21-3p (Table 1). Since one miRNA can regulate different target genes [25], miR-21-3p can target diverse genes in various species. Among various categories from Table 1, this study focused on MFE score that indicates the degree of affinity between miRNA and its 3´ UTR target region. Within the genes with high MFE score, six genes were selected KANK2, SNAPC3, HN1, AIFM1, RELA, and PPIL2. These candidates for the target gene of miR-21-3p were indicated by multiple bioinformatic analysis. Of these, six target genes were selected and the hybridization between 3´ UTR of the target genes and the seed region of miR-21-3p was demonstrated using the RNA hybrid tool (Fig. 5). One of the highest MFE scores was PPIL2, peptidylprolyl isomerase-like 2 acts as a chaperone with putative ubiquitin ligase activity [31, 32]. Until now, there have been few studies about the function of miR-21-3p, but there are several studies about PPIL2 functions in other fields. PPIL2 related target genes are preserved in primates such as gorilla and gibbon (Fig. 7). Likewise, PRCC encodes proline-rich protein PRCC‒PPIL2 complex, which acts as protein folding, transport and degradation in the brain of Alzheimer’s disease patients in previous study [33]. Other studies have also shown that PPIL2 interacts with intronic-miRNAs such as miR-130b in host genomes [34, 35].
Quantitative expression pattern for the miR-21-3p and PPIL2 genes was examined in various olive flounder tissues in the present study. The miR-21-3p expression level was up-expressed except for testis tissue as shown in Fig. 8A. The expression of miR-21-3p in liver of olive flounder significantly increased compared to the other tissues. This result was previously reported up-regulation for liver tissue of Japanese flounder in miR-17 that involved in Japanese flounder metamorphic developmental stages [16]. As PPIL2 was found to be a target gene of miR-21-3p, this study performed qRT-PCR to confirm the expression patterns of various tissues in olive flounder. The expression levels of PPIL2 gene was highest in the testis, followed by the fin, kidney and brain. This result proposed that PPIL2 has an enzyme activity for peptidyl prolyl isomerase (PPIases), related to function of posttranslational modification that accumulate the isomerization of peptidyl prolyl bonds in peptides and proteins [36]. PPIases can be classified into three families; cyclophilin, FKBP, and parvulins. Among these families, Pin1 belongs to the parvulin family that regulates the function of phosphorylated protein like the cell cycle regulatory molecules [37]. These three families of PPIases activity was up-expressed in wild-type mice testis lysate both mRNA and protein levels [38]. Taken together, our data indicated that PPIL2 gene expression showed complementary results with those of miR-21-3p expression in various tissues of olive flounder.
In summary, genomic and bioinformatics analyses of miR-21-3p allow us to speculate the biological function in relation to the target genes of the miR-21-3p in olive flounder. In various target genes, 3´ UTR region of PPIL2 gene showed the highest binding affinity with miR-21-3p based on the MFE value. Therefore, we examined the expression pattern in both miR-21-3p and PPIL2 gene, indicating that the miR-21-3p seems to repress the expression of PPIL2 gene. Our bioinformatics data could be of great use as further studies in relation to the biological roles of miR-21-3p in various species.