In 1898, a microbiologist, Heinrich Winterberg, first described that there was a discrepancy in the number of microorganisms between culturable bacteria on nutrient media and the total bacteria in nature counted by microscopy. Since then, microbial unculturability, the so-called 'great plate count anomaly,' has long been recognized in microbiology [1]. While microbial unculturability is not fully understood so far, microbial diversity has been analyzed extensively in various environments. This was mostly due to the advance of a molecular microbial ecology. The development of culture-independent analysis adopted amplification and DNA sequencing of microbial signature rRNA sequences from nature without cultivation of entire microbial species [2]. Therefore, analysis of the microbial phylogenetic marker genes, such as the 16S rRNA gene, revealed that microorganisms are the true dominant organism in nature [3]. The number of prokaryotic cells was estimated to be 4-6 × 1030 cells on Earth, and the prokaryotes represent the largest pool of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus among living organisms [4]. Microbial diversity has also been recognized from various soils, and only a small fraction of total microbial species in soil (i.e., less than 1%) has been characterized by cultivation-based methods [5, 6]. Since the majority of unculturable bacteria in soil has not been cultured [7], it has not been functionally characterized.
The microbial diversity in soil is probably highest compared to other microbial communities. Culture-independent analysis of microbial diversity in soil revealed that most bacterial members abundant in soils are members of the phyla Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, Actinobacterium, Firmicutes, and some Verrucomicrobia [8, 9], showing that a large number of the 16S rRNA gene clones originated from uncultured bacterial species. The abundance of the members was somewhat variable in different types of soil. For example, the forest soils retained higher members of the phylum Acidobacteria but fewer β-proteobacterial members [10]. On the other hand, agricultural soils harbor higher numbers of members in β-proteobacteria but less Acidobacteria. The interesting result recently reported by Mendes et al. [11] indicated that the relative abundance of bacterial phyla, not their profiles, could be important for microbial community function in a specific soil, such as disease-suppressive soil.