Asthma is a disease that is caused by inflammation in the lung and bronchus and is affected by genetic and environmental influences. Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD), which was first reported in 1922, is a type of asthma. AERD is characterized by the following three symptoms: bronchial asthma, aspirin sensitivity, and nasal polyposis [1, 2, 3]. It has been reported that 10-20% of asthma patients have aspirin sensitivity, whereas 1-2% of the non-asthma population shows aspirin sensitivity [4, 5]. Although the mechanisms of AERD pathogenesis are still not fully understood, inflammatory responses by overproduction of leukotrienes are regarded as the main pathogenesis of AERD.
Aspirin is a commonly used medication, which belongs to the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Despite being a widely used medication, aspirin intake also causes various side effects, including manifested gastrointestinal ulcer, stomach bleeding, and tinnitus, especially in higher doses. Although the side effects of aspirin are not common, these effects have been reported in about 10% of adult asthmatics. In AERD pathogenesis, aspirin inhibits the activation of cyclooxygenase-1 enzyme, leading to block of production of prostaglandin and thromboxane. This mechanism causes overproduction of leukotrienes, such as leukotriene B4, leukotriene C4, leukotriene D4, and leukotriene E4 [6, 7].
The tyrosine-protein kinase Tec (TEC) is a member of the non-receptor tyrosine kinases and has critical roles in cell signaling transmission, calcium mobilization, gene expression, and transformation [8]. It has been known that TEC family kinases are associated with various intracellular signaling mechanisms, such as cytokine receptors and lymphocyte surface antigens [9, 10]. In particular, it was demonstrated that the TEC family proteins are involved in regulation of leukotriene secretion via the mast cell signaling pathway [11]. Therefore, we hypothesized that TEC polymorphisms might be involved in AERD pathogenesis. In the present study, 38 TEC single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in a total of 592 subjects, which comprised 163 AERD cases and 429 aspirin-tolerant asthma (ATA) controls, to examine the associations between TEC polymorphisms and AERD susceptibility.