Quantitative Neuropeptidomics
MS-based peptidomic techniques allow for measuring relative levels of peptides in different conditions of the samples, as well as peptide identification. Quantitation of peptides based on MS is generally achieved either by stable isotope labeling or label-free approaches (Fig. 3) [5051]. In stable isotope labeling, the relative levels of peptides in two different samples are typically examined by labeling the peptides in one sample with a light stable isotope and those in the other sample with a heavy stable isotope; the two samples are then combined and analyzed together. The relative levels of the peptides are calculated by the difference in the MS peaks (peak intensity or peak area) of the two samples. While the stable isotopes can be introduced to the peptides either metabolically or through chemical reactions, isotope labeling through chemical reactions enables one to obtain quantitative information from biological samples, such as brain tissues, for which metabolic labeling is not available. A number of different isotopic tags, including acetic anhydride, succinic anhydride, and trimethylammonium butyrate (TMAB), have been used for quantitative analyses of endogenous peptides in various samples and conditions [63452]. For example, the TMAB tag was used to evaluate the relative changes of endogenous peptides in response to food intake or drug treatment [535455] and to assess the role of protein convertase 1/3 and 2 in the processing of the peptides in mouse models [5657]. In label-free methods, each sample is prepared separately and then subjected directly to individual LC-MS or LC-MS/MS runs, followed by comparisons of either the mass spectral peak intensities of the detected peptides or the total number of MS/MS spectra identified for a peptide, called spectral counting [51]. Since there is no limit to the number of samples that can be compared, label-free quantitation allows for the comparison of multiple samples or conditions. The approach has been used to measure the changes in the levels of neuropeptides present during the daytime and nighttime in the rat SCN [5859] and to examine the expression changes of endogenous peptides involved in the embryogenesis of Japanese quail brains [60] and the nucleus accumbens of morphine-dependent rats [61]. In addition, quantitative peptidomic analyses based on peak intensities has enabled us to discover endogenous peptides associated with repeated exposure to amphetamine and with individual variations in sensitivity to the behavioral effects of cocaine in rat models [6263].