Downing and Ross wrote that sales of DTC genetic tests, including 23andMe's PGS, could be resumed only if reliable data have been accumulated that can demonstrate that the tests have positive clinical validity and can be used safely without professional supervision [19]. As we mentioned above, this task is easier said than done-it can be practically impossible. Even the same authors actually emphasized the importance of the physician's role in the same article, which can "contextualize" test results for maximizing clinical benefit, preventing adverse effects, and genuinely empowering patients [19]. Zettler et al. [20] wrote that the FDA's warning to 23andMe may effectively mark the end of the DTC genetic testing field, at least in the United States, if 23andMe's PGS cannot meet the FDA's standards for clinical validity. DTC genetic testing companies, such as Navigenics and deCODEme, were already sold to other firms and stopped their health-related services in 2012 [20]. The problem is that no one knows, at the moment, how strict the FDA's standards for clinical validity will be.
Another question will definitely be this: what will happen to whole-genome and exome sequencing, which is already replacing single-gene tests or SNP chips, in terms of clinical application? Interestingly, just 3 days before warning 23andMe, the FDA authorized Illumina to market four "next-generation" gene sequencing devices: a sequencing platform, two assays-the MiSeqDx Cystic Fibrosis 139-Variant Assay and MiSeqDx Cystic Fibrosis Clinical Sequencing Assay-and a "universal kit" that allows laboratories that purchase the platform to develop and validate sequencing of any part of a patient's genome and to find any differences between the patient and the reference [21]. What made the difference in the fate of these two companies? We have not made an inquiry about this directly to the US FDA but can get some clues from the FDA's press release about this authorization. First of all, it said that these assays will check "specific points in the patient's CFTR gene sequence" to detect known and unknown variants. Their reports will include the existence of genetic variants in the gene sequence that are known to be associated with one specific disease but will not provide medical interpretations of the findings. Second, it did not mention non-patient customers at all. Finally, the press release also emphasized the clinician's involvement. It said that "this information-rich technology is becoming more accessible for use by physicians in the care of their patients" and that "the new technology also gives physicians the ability to take a broader look at their patients' genetic makeup and can help in diagnosing disease or identifying the cause of symptoms" [21]. We believe that the US FDA's authorization of the MiSeqDX for cystic fibrosis reflects the agency's attitude towards any tests involving the human genome. Therefore, from this, we can guess the answer to the question we posed above: any genetic/genome/exome tests will be required to prove their analytical and clinical validity and clinical utility for specific diseases and conditions if they are intended for medical applications. Until then, we suggest that their application should be restricted to research applications and family studies for diagnosing genetic disorders of unknown etiology. When a human being is involved, we believe that the most important ethics principle is "Do no harm."