In this review, we summarized a battery of bioinformatics analyses for network-based biomarker discovery using LC-MS/MS data. These analyses include peptide/protein identification using database search engines, peptide/protein quantification from MS or MS/MS data, identification of DEPs using statistical methods, functional enrichment analysis of DEPs using diverse enrichment tools, and network modeling and analysis of DEPs, as well as integrative analysis of disparate global datasets with the LC-MS/MS data.
Peptide identification using database search has been known as a main challenge. Of the MS/MS spectra measured, about half of them are commonly mapped to peptide sequences. The inclusion of PTMs in database search can map the unidentified MS/MS spectra to peptide sequences. However, the PTM inclusion exponentially increases the search time and thus it would be practically impossible to include the most common five PTMs, phosphorylation, glycosylation, ubiquitination, methylation, and acetylation in database search. Recently, although several search tools, such as MODa [68], with improved search speeds have been developed, there is still significant needs for efficient search tools that can include the five common PTMs in the search.
Moreover, protein quantification has been also one of the challenges in MS-based proteomic analysis. Relative protein abundances are estimated by combining the ratios of abundances of the peptides derived from the protein. The same peptide sequences can be derived from multiple proteins due to the redundancy in their sequences, which can cause the discrepancy in the ratios of the peptides from the same protein between control and patient samples. Also, technical and biological variability can add the discrepancy to the peptide ratios. Because of these sources of the discrepancy in the peptide ratios, it has been difficult to estimate the relative ratios of protein abundances between control and patient samples. Recently, although the optimization-based quantification tools, such as linear programming [33], have been developed, there have been significant needs for the quantification methods with improved accuracy.
Due to the issue with protein quantification, identification of DEPs can be also erroneous when inaccurate ratios of protein abundances exist. Additional criteria, such as the number of patients showing fold-changes larger than a cutoff (e.g., 1.5-fold), are used to reduce the error (false-positives) in identification of DEPs. The error in identification of DEPs can further propagate into functional enrichment analysis and network modeling and analysis for the DEPs. Finally, the integrative analysis of disparate global datasets suffers from different scales of fold-changes and the size of detected molecules in the different types of global datasets. For example, mRNA fold-changes between control and patient samples can be relatively larger than the fold-changes of protein abundances, which may cause the bias toward mRNA fold-changes during the integration of fold-changes of mRNA and protein abundances. Also, differentially expressed microRNAs between control and patient samples are smaller than the DEPs or mRNAs, which can lead to the bias toward the DEPs or mRNAs during the integration. Various integration strategies have been proposed to reduce the intrinsic bias from the differences in the size of disparate global datasets. For example, in these methods, mRNA and protein abundance ratios are first integrated and the data with small sizes are separately integrated to the outputs from the initial integration of mRNA and protein data. However, regarding the scale difference in fold-changes, there have been the needs for the algorithms that can effectively normalize the different scales of fold-changes in different datasets.