Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the leading causes of death in the world and include a group of disorders that occur in the heart or the arteries [1]. Coronary artery disease (CAD) as a most common type is caused by atherosclerosis that includes stable angina, unstable angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. Atherosclerosis can be created over time. It is considered a high-risk factor that could be able to restrict blood flow to the heart by increasing arterial blockage [2, 3]. Despite survival improvement in patients with CVD, specific diagnostic biomarkers have not been fully determined, and such therapies do not fully address the underlying cause.
Specific regulatory networks are required to coordinate development, physiological response, and environmental adaption of heart function that these regulatory networks are composed of pre-mediated transcriptional control and signaling pathway [4]. More recent studies have revealed that how specific physiological and pathological processes possessed by a highly diverse group of regulatory non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) through transcriptional and epigenetic changes [5, 6]. The ncRNAs make up the majority (98%) of the transcriptome, and different classes of this regulatory RNA are discovered. They are classified based on their length and function. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) as a major group of regulatory ncRNA are longer than 200 nt in size [7, 8]. It has been clarified that some lncRNAs in the plasma were expressed differentially in CVDs, and aberrant changes of them as a new diagnostic biomarker were involved in the development and physiological function of heart disorders [9, 10]. Recent studies have depicted the important role of HOTAIR (HOX antisense intergenic RNA) in the acute myocardial infarction, vascular inflammation, and age-related CVDs but research on the role of lncRNAs in CAD is still in its infancy [11–13].
Among the lncRNAs, HOTAIR is an RNA that illustrates the importance of lncRNAs in different diseases and cancers [14, 15]. It is transcribed from the HOXC cluster and represses transcription of HOXD gene as well as different other genes through targeting the histone modifications on desired genes [16, 17].
Analyzing high-throughput data characterized the expression of lncRNA under the normal physiological condition as well as disease status. It shows that several lncRNAs are regulated during myocardial infarction and heart failure while some of them control hypertrophy [18]. Different studies indicate the potential role of HOTAIR in CVDs. Cai et al. [19] found a number of lncRNAs that were differentially expressed in circulating peripheral blood monocytes and plasma from 15 CAD patients and 15 control subjects. In their supplementary data, it was shown that HOTAIR is one of the lncRNAs that is up-regulated in circulating peripheral blood monocytes (p = 0.0054855, fold change = 2.0744882) and plasma (p = 0.002561755, fold change = 8.213123) in patients with CAD compared to non-CAD patients. Based on this, we aimed to further analyze the expression level of HOTAIR in patients with CAD compared to non-CAD patients by semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Our data can provide new evidence for the potential role of HOTAIR in coronary artery disease.