Differential methylation and expression analysis and clustering
To get differential DNA methylation values between normal tissue and tumor, we averaged all normal samples using annotated probes. For CGI analysis purposes, we intersected each beta-value for a total of 485,579 probes from the methylation data to the CGI location (provided by University of California Santa Cruz [UCSC]), averaged them using CGIs, and then subtracted the averaged DNA methylation value of normal samples from individual tumor samples. To focus on the effect of promoter CGIs, we selected CGIs that fell only into our defined promoter region, which covers the transcription start site ± 1 kb. Using this boundary, a total of 15,966 promoter CGIs were counted. The methylation distribution pattern of promoter CGIs was plotted by taking the mean promoter CGI methylation from the entire tumor and normal sample datasets. To get differentially methylated promoter CGIs, the averaged normal data were used as a reference, since there were no significant variations among normal samples. Differential patient data were calculated by subtracting this reference from each patient methylation data point (n = 297). In order to define the differential methylation cutoff, we referred to the methylation distribution pattern between normal samples and tumors. Methylated CGI annotated genes varied in their methylation percentage throughout the patients. Therefore, differentially methylated CGIs were identified as absolute difference of 0.3 in beta-values in at least 30% of total patients to obtain a broader range for gene selection (Fig. 1).
We grouped COAD patients by clustering their CGI differential methylation values using Cluster3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm). We specifically used hierarchical clustering using the Euclidean distance similarity metric and the complete linkage clustering method, which grouped the patients the best. To reveal the direct methylation effect on gene expression, we selected an expression dataset that only matched with the methylation dataset, as well as a normal sample-tumor paired dataset (n = 26). We then aligned 26 paired patient data to the each group, divided by the CGI methylation clustering value. Expression level of patients in each group were averaged by genes and then plotted with mean values and 95% confidence levels.