As aforementioned, nc886 is a molecular switch for a protein to modulate its activity. That protein is protein kinase R (PKR). PKR is an interferon-inducible, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase that senses viral infection in the cellular cytoplasm (reviewed in Garcia et al. [23]). The PKR signaling pathway is very complicated: it is activated by several other stresses besides viral infection and its activation affects many downstream pathways. Elaboration on the whole PKR pathway is beyond the scope of this review, but here a very brief introduction only about relevant parts will be provided.
Upon viral infection, the classical PKR pathway begins with its binding to virus-derived dsRNA that activates PKR and subsequently its downstream events, including (1) phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2α subunit (eIF2α) to block global protein synthesis and (2) activation of nuclear factor κ-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (nuclear factor κB [NF-κB]). The PKR:eIF2α branch leads to apoptosis and this explains how mammalian organisms eliminate virally-infected cells. In contrast, the PKR:NF-κB branch is usually considered to be pro-survival. Besides the innate immune response, numerous papers have also documented PKR's role in cancer in the absence of viral infection. Along with its two opposite functions through eIF2α and NF-κB, both tumor suppressive and oncogenic roles for PKR have been reported in cancer (reviewed in Marchal et al. [24]).
nc886 binds to PKR with an affinity comparable to dsRNA and prevents PKR from being activated, in contrast to the PKR-activating ligand dsRNA [458910]. One reason for these contradictory outcomes between nc886 and dsRNA is their difference in length. dsRNA is long enough to accommodate PKR dimerization which is a necessary step for its autophosphorylation and subsequent activation (Fig. 3). nc886 at 101 nts long is probably too short for two PKR molecules to bind. When nc886 is ectopically expressed, it attenuates dsRNA-mediated PKR activation [10]. Notably, knockdown of nc886 is sufficient for PKR activation in the absence of dsRNA [4589], indicating that human PKR has an intrinsic tendency to self-activate and so needs a repressor to avoid its aberrant activation. In summary, nc886 is a PKR inhibitor.