The synchronic evolution of bacterial pathogens and virulence-associated determinants encoded by horizontally transferred genetic elements has been observed in several species. However, E. coli is a normal member of the intestinal microflora of humans and animals. E. coli strains have acquired virulence factors by the attainment of particular genetic loci through horizontal gene transfer, transposons, or phages. These elements frequently encode multiple factors that enable bacteria to colonize the host and initiate disease development [16]. CDTs belong to one such class of virulence-associated factors. CDT was first identified in E. coli by Johnson and Lior in 1988 [17]; since then several studies have been reported that CDTs can be produced by intestinal and extra-intestinal pathogenic bacteria [18].
In this study, the genomes of 25 CDT+ E. coli strains were acquired from several gene banks. Multiple genome comparisons with 49 CDT− E. coli strains, including EPEC (enteropathogenic E. coli), ETEC (enterotoxigenic E. coli), STEC (Shiga toxin-producing E. coli), EAEC (enteroaggregative E. coli), EIEC (enteroinvasive E. coli), AIEC (adherent invasive E. coli), UPEC (uropathogenic E. coli), ExPEC (extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli), EHEC (enterohemorrhagic E. coli), environmental strains and commensal strains were performed.
In fact, phylogenic analysis based on whole-genome information is more accurate than those based on one gene or a set of limited genes. In this study, CDT-producing strains were not shown a phylogenomic relationship or pattern. Indeed, while they might carry the same or similar virulence gene sets, they also possess their own divergent genomic structures. This is probably because of their complex and distinct evolutionary pathways, indicating an independent acquisition of mobile genetic elements during their evolution.
The sporadic pattern in the phylogenomic dendrogram confirmed previous findings that CDT+ strains are heterogeneous. The heterogeneous nature of CDT-producing strains might arise from horizontal gene transfer through mobile genetic elements. These genetic exchanges that occur in bacteria provide genetic diversity and versatility [19].
A significant challenge in comparative genomics is the utilization of large datasets to identify specific sequence signatures that are biologically important or are useful in diagnosis [420]. In this study, we define CDT-producing E. coli as the target group and found regions that were conserved that could serve as genomic signatures for the target group. Because of the heterogeneous genomic nature of CDT+ E. coli, five reference strains were selected instead of one, including EIEC, ExPEC, EPEC, STEC B2F1, and STEC C165-02. Moreover, in the phylogenomic overview, these five reference strains were selected from different clades of the phylogenic tree, representing the T1–T6 groups.
The findings was presented in this study indicate that the major conserved biomarkers beyond CDT were exonuclease, phage integrase, putative membrane, and tail-fiber proteins. Furthermore, with signature proteins of a targeted group, it was shown that phage-related proteins and virulence-associated factors could be commonly transferred by phages. Moreover, in the putative conserved domains of biomarker proteins, phage-related superfamilies were frequently observed. As a result, cdt genes were used as a signature sequences in CDT-producing E. coli strains, and it was shown that they can be used as a powerful biomarker.
In this study, the most significant signature proteins in the five E. coli strains were identified using in-silico whole-genome sequences. It was demonstrated that conserved signature proteins were expressed in a wide range of pathogenic bacterial strains, which could be used in future studies in a broad range of research applications and in modern vaccine-design strategies.