Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes characterized by an early onset, usually before the age of 25 years; an autosomal dominant inheritance; and a defect in pancreatic β-cell function [1]. Depending on the specific gene mutation, the synthesis and secretion of insulin are altered at different stages. MODY is classified according to its affected genes, which include those encoding enzymes, transcription factors, and other types of proteins [1, 2]. The transcription factors associated with MODY act in the nucleus of β-cells and regulate the transcription of INS or other genes encoding enzymes involved in glucose transport and metabolism [1].
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1β (HNF-1β) is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor that forms a homodimer or heterodimer with structurally related HNF-1α [3]. HNF1B has 9 exons and encodes a 557-amino-acid peptide. Its structure is characterized by a highly conserved DNA-binding domain composed of an atypical POU-specific (POUS) and POU-homeo (POUH) domain, but the molecular properties of HNF-1β have not been studied much. HNF-1 β is known for playing a role in tissue-specific gene expression in organs, including the liver, kidney, and pancreatic islets [4], and is involved in the β-cell transcription factor network [5]. Heterozygous mutations of HNF1B, which encodes HNF-1β, result in maturity-onset diabetes of the young 5 (MODY5), which is characterized by early-onset diabetes and various abnormalities, such as renal cysts, renal impairment, genital malformation, or hepatobiliary involvement [6, 7, 8, 9]. Patients with mutations in HNF1B have impaired insulin secretory responses to glucose and insulin secretagogues [7, 10, 11] and show progressive loss in basal insulin secretion.
Mutation in HNF1B was first described by Horikawa et al. in 1997 [12]. Different mutation types, including missense, nonsense, and frameshift mutations, have been found in different domains [13, 14, 15]. Recently, mutations in exon 2 and in the DNA-binding domain have been reported [16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Barbacci et al. [21] characterized eight naturally occurring mutations in different domains. Truncated mutations showed defective nuclear localization and weak dominant-negative activity, whereas a frameshift mutation within the QSP-rich domain had partially reduced transcriptional activity. Missense mutations in POUS and POUH exhibited severe decreases in transcription. A certain mutation showed a gain-of-function phenotype [22, 23]. In vitro studies suggested that clinical phenotypes may be related to loss of function and/or dominant-negative mechanisms [8, 24].
In this study, we have identified a family with MODY5 harboring a heterozygous P159L HNF1B mutation. We evaluated the functional consequences of this HNF1B mutation on glucose metabolism.