The redundant nature of eukaryotic genomes was analyzed well before the dawn of modern genomic analysis. Waring and Britten [9] demonstrated that not all DNA coded for genes in eukaryotes by reassociation kinetic analysis of mouse DNA. The DNA reassociation kinetic analysis, Cot analysis, allows one to dissect the genomic composition in several species, in which the genomes of complex organisms can be fractionated into several classes depending on the repetitiveness, such as unique, slightly repetitive, moderately repetitive, and highly repetitive sequences [10]. The Cot analysis was very useful in the analysis of the genome complexity in species with large genomes, such as major crop plants [11, 12, 13].
When the eukaryotic chromosomes are dissected at the molecular level, sequence composition is not even along the chromosomes. While the low-copy protein coding sequences are clustered in discrete blocks between various repetitive DNA sequences, the repeated DNA sequences are located at a few defined sites or widely dispersed, depending on the classes of repetitive DNA [14, 15]. The chromosomal landmarks of repeated sequences include centromeres, telomeres, nucleolus organizing region (NOR), and heterochromatin. While centromeres house highly repeated satellite DNA sequences and Ty3/gypsy long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons, Ty1/copia LTR retrotransposons and microsatellites or simple sequence repeats are dispersed and present in clusters [15, 16]. The 18S-5.8S-25S rRNA gene repeats are on the NORs, which appear as secondary constrictions in cytological preparations [14, 15]. Another repeat of the 5S rRNA gene is also clustered in one or more sites in chromosomes [14, 15, 16]. The chromosomal tips, telomeres, also contain many thousands of the telomere repeat TTAGGG [14, 17]. Besides these repeat motifs, many other types of intercalary tandem repeats or dispersed repeats are also scattered along the chromosomes.
Eukaryotic nuclear DNA is packaged into chromatin structure. During interphase, the local structure of chromatin depends on the genes present in the DNA. The low-copy protein-coding genes are loosely packaged into euchromatin, whereas sequences of protein-noncoding genes are tightly packaged into the gene desert heterochromatin. The local chromatin structure can be altered by epigenetic chemical modification of the DNA and chromatin-associated proteins. The chromatin structure dynamic is a critical process in the regulation of DNA replication, gene expression control, and cell division [18]. Some points of the epigenetic control of gene expression and DNA replication are beyond the scope of this review; so, epigenetic chromatin modifications will be dealt here in detail only in relation with genome size and transposable elements.