System environment
Fig. 5 shows the system environment in which the IABio system is composed with OAuth 2.0 of a medical information standard environment.
The system environment has the structure of a hardware and development environment. Two servers are used: IABio server and authorization server. HP ProLiant Micro Server Gen8 is used to design the IABio database, and it consists of 1TB SSD, 2TB HDD, and 12GB RAM. To compose the development environment, Apache 2.2 is used as server software to configure the Tomcat Server. For the web service, PHP 5.2 is used to supplement the functions of existing HTTP language. MySQL 5.1 is used to compose the Tomcat server and PHP, which can interwork with the database. APM (Apache, PHP, MySQL) is mutually complementary and flexible for interworking. Furthermore, it is compatible with all operating systems, such as Unix, Linux, and Windows.
The authorization server uses Naver application programming interface (API), which supports OAuth 2.0 [12]. Since Naver API provides a security server in itself, it is cost-effective. In addition, it is possible to customize so as to receive an authorization token by using Naver ID. Currently, most domestic web service providers related to authorization use OAuth 2.0 of Naver API. Therefore, it can ensure security. JSON method is employed for the exchange of messages between a portal and database server and authorization server. The JSON method enables message exchange with shorter codes than the existing Extensible Markup Language (XML) method. Therefore, it is faster in speed and can reduce load.
For security protocol, IUA guidelines and OAuth 2.0 are used. PHP 2.2 is used to realize OAuth 2.0. The JSON method can transmit authorization tokens and protect users' personal information.
The database module is structured to have access to genome data. The authorization token method should be used to have access to a database module. The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 256 algorithm is used to enhance the level of security. AES 256 is a symmetric key algorithm that supports block passwords. AES 256 is the most reliable symmetric key algorithm among any developed thus far. Its method uses key values used between a user and service. A user can access the web portal and database without concerned keys. PHP 2.2 is used for the module to have access to and operate IABio. In addition, MPI is used to ensure the integrity of the genome database. It can support interworking between data. Therefore, data integration is possible. Furthermore, because MPI uses Hash 256, each user can confirm which data are interworked. The Bio-Marker database is composed so as to receive the entry of gene data, protein data, and brain imaging data.