He underwent surgery performed by thoracic surgeons. His final pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma and revealed the involvement of some mediastinal lymph nodes; therefore, the final pathological stage was T2N2, IIIA. This stage required adjuvant chemotherapy, and he was referred to the department of medical oncology. A medical oncologist prescribed adjuvant chemotherapy-a navelbine and cisplatin regimen (NP) for 4 cycles.
NP 4 cycles has been prescribed to patients with high-risk clinical stage IB, IIA, IIB, IIIA, and IIIB, regardless of other clinicopathological factors. The actual benefit from this treatment is only a 4% long-term survival advantage, with some hematological and non-hematological toxicities [19, 20]. The way to improve the risk-to-benefit ratio of adjuvant treatment is further selection of a patient population that could benefit from this treatment. Stage-based risk calculation-the current practice-cannot predict an accurate risk of relapse and attenuates the value of adjuvant treatment. Single patient-based risk calculation should be done to identify the adequate patients for adjuvant treatment. Cancer genomics will provide useful tools for a single patient-based risk calculation model. This personalized adjuvant model will definitely increase the proportion of patients who benefit from it.
There are also clinical needs of prognosis prediction even before surgery. Surgical management of stage IIIA is controversial. If he had been diagnosed as stage IIIA preoperatively, he might have chosen a no-surgery option, such as concurrent chemoradiation, because no definite benefit of surgery was demonstrated until now, although this is controversial [21, 22]. We have relatively sensitive diagnostic methods, such as CT, PET, and endobronchial ultrasonography, but the sensitivity and specificity are still not perfect. One focus of genomics technology should be a more accurate prognosis preoperatively, in addition to postoperatively.
Prediction issues in cancer patients are not limited to survival, recurrence, and response to specific treatment. The goal of cancer care is improvement of survival and, more importantly, quality of life. Predictive markers of bone metastasis or bone-related events, such as fracture or paralysis, are very important to improve the quality of life in cancer patients. We have no clinically validated markers to predict these events [23]. An unbiased approach is needed to discover good biomarker for these events, because we have very limited clues to dig into these problems. The most important advantage of genomics approach is that is "unbiased" with regard to any hypotheses or theories. That is why clinical problems with low-depth knowledge are a good candidate for the application of cancer genomics. The connection between clinicians and genomic scientists can facilitate the development of clinical problems that are solved with a genomic approach.