In this study, we identified a MODY5 family with a nonsynonymous mutation in the HNF1B gene. The patient was suspected to have MODY, especially MODY5, because of the lack of response to sulfonylureas, early (within 3 years) requirement of exogenous insulin, and features of insulin resistance [25]. Although the patient did not have specific clinical features of HNF1B mutation, such as cystic kidney disease [6], she had fulfilled the clinical diagnostic criteria of MODY. The clinical features of MODY5 vary as either diabetes or urinary tract malformation, or both could be the presenting symptoms [14, 20, 26]. According to a systematic review performed by Chen et al. [27], renal structural anomalies are relatively less frequent in missense mutations than in other types of mutation. On the contrary, the percentage of diabetes mellitus and the frequency of insulin treatment tended to be higher.
The mutation of P159L was heterozygous c.476C>T in exon 2 of HNF1B, which is in the DNA-binding domain. Chen et al. [27] found that mutations in HNF1B were more likely to be located in the DNA-binding domain, and the hotspots were in exons 2 and 4. Yamagata [28] reviewed that N228K is a relatively common polymorphism in Pima Indians, and the A241T, G492S, and S465R mutations might be rare polymorphisms. In HNF1B-deficient mouse embryos, a dorsal bud of the pancreas is formed transiently and becomes absent, whereas the ventral bud is not affected [29]. In two 8-week human fetuses with HNF1B mutations, severe pancreas hypoplasia was observed [30]. With these consistent findings, the abnormality in the morphogenesis of the pancreas is thought to be one of the causes of diabetes in MODY5 patients.
Another suggested molecular mechanism is related to altered GLUT2 expression. Wild-type HNF-1β is known to bind to the cis-element of GLUT2 and efficiently increase its transcription [24]. In this study, overexpression of wild-type HNF-1β resulted in an increase in transcriptional activity of the GLUT2 promoter, whereas overexpression of the P159L mutant resulted in decreased GLUT2 expression. Previous studies showed similar results in various types of cells, such as COS-7, MIN6, and HepG2 [20, 24]. GLUT2 is a low-affinity, high-capacity transporter expressed mainly in hepatocytes, renal proximal tubule cells, and pancreatic β-cells [31, 32]. GLUT2 plays a role in β-cell insulin secretion, as it senses external glucose and transports it into pancreatic β-cells [33]. In vivo studies showed that GLUT2-deficient mice were hyperglycemic, resulting in diabetes with impaired glucose sensing by pancreatic β-cells [34], and GLUT2 was undetectable on β-cells of the two HNF1B mutant fetuses [29]. So, decreased expression of GLUT2 in β-cells, combined with a gradual reduction in insulin secretion, could be involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus in MODY5 patients. In addition, GLUT2 may also affect β-cell differentiation in the development of the pancreas [34, 35].
EMSA was done to examine whether the reduced transcription activity was due to the decreased DNA-binding capacity. Both mutant HNF-1β proteins had decreased DNA-binding activity compared to the wild-type. It was previously reported that the H153N HNF-1β mutation had diminished DNA-binding activity [20]. Since both P159L and H153N mutants have intact dimerization domains, it is possible that they could dimerize with wild-type HNF-1β [9]. However, the mutant/wild-type dimer seems to have a defect in DNA binding and limited ability to increase the transcription of GLUT2. The mRNA expression of GLUT2 was increased with wild-type HNF-1β but significantly suppressed, almost to the level observed in the empty control vector, in both mutants. The findings of the real-time PCR analysis of GLUT2 were consistent with the reporter gene assay and DNA binding assay.
On the other hand, there has been limited knowledge regarding the mRNA expression of INS with mutant HNF-1β. The mRNA levels of INS were not statistically different between the wild-type- and mutant-expressing MIN6 cells. In one study with HNF-1α, neither the wild-type nor the mutant activated GLUT2 or the insulin promoter in MIN6 cells [36]. The authors concluded that endogenous HNF-1α, GLUT2, and insulin proteins in MIN6 cells could interfere in the transfected reporter assay. The mRNA expression of INS is also considered to be regulated by other transcription factors, and it might have been compensated for by complex mechanisms against the mutation of HNF1B. Overall, the impaired insulin secretion in MODY5 patients might be explained by pancreatic hypoplasia or β-cell dysgenesis rather than decreased mRNA expression of INS. As described above, decreased mRNA expression of GLUT2 might also result in the inhibition of insulin secretion.
This study has some limitations. First, we could not sequence HNF1B of the patient's grandmother, who was also a patient with diabetes. If she had the same P159L mutation of HNF1B, it would have revealed an autosomal dominant inheritance more clearly. Second, alterations in insulin secretion with the mutation in the pancreatic β-cell line were not evaluated. Further studies of functional changes in the P159L mutation are needed.
In conclusion, we have identified a P159L mutation of HNF1B in a family with MODY5 and have characterized the functional consequences of this nonsynonymous mutation in the pathogenesis of diabetes. This mutation revealed decreased DNA-binding activity and decreased transcriptional activity of GLUT2. The mRNA expression of GLUT2 in pancreatic β-cell lines was also significantly decreased with this mutation, whereas that of INS was not altered. Impaired insulin secretion in the patient with the P159L mutation in HNF1B might be associated with the alteration of GLUT2-related signaling pathways.