Here, we report 1,694 genome-wide sQTLs in Arabidopsis thaliana with a high-throughput RNA-seq dataset. RNA-seq using next generation sequencing provides an accurate method for annotation and quantification of exons than the exon array method, and this is greatly helpful for the investigation of sQTLs [15]. Arabidopsis thaliana is a model organism to study the genetic elements of plants [1]. Thus, an sQTL survey in Arabidopsis thaliana as a model organism has importance for understanding the regulation of alternative splicing of plants. However, there are only a few studies on sQTLs in plant. Thus, our result may be a great resource to explain the genetic regulation of alternative splicing patterns. Furthermore, the sQTLs can be useful for explaining known trait-associated SNPs. A recent study showed that genetic markers with various traits have been discovered in Arabidopsis [3]. However, their molecular mechanisms have remained elusive. sQTLs are able to alter alternative splicing patterns, and consequently, they can lead to phenotypic variations [5678]. Thus, our result can be useful in interpreting trait-associated SNPs as sQTLs. For example, the OVA1 gene encodes a functional protein for methionine-tRNA ligase, having several alpha-helices. The polymorphism, in chr3:20,536,243, was reported to have an association with the flower pedicel [3]. However, this molecular mechanism has been not elucidated. Through our result, the SNP was shown to have an association with an alternative 3′ splicing site of the ninth exon of the OVA1 gene. We predicted the three-dimensional structure of proteins translated by transcription, including normal exons and the alternative 3′ splicing site of the ninth exon, respectively, using the RaptorX Structure Prediction tool, a web-based protein structure prediction tool [16]. As a result, translation of the transcript with the alternative 3′ splicing site showed a loss of 2 alpha helices (Fig. 2B). It is tempting to speculate that the SNP, in chr3:20,536,243, which is known as a trait-associated locus, is able to lead to translation of abnormal protein and consequently affect the flower pedicel. Further biochemical studies of this alternative spliced transcription may be able to validate our prediction. Our result can explain only a small portion of trait-associated SNPs. However, these sQTLs can be a powerful resource for the interpretation of more trait-associated loci that will be found in the coming years. Furthermore, since there have been few investigations of genome-wide sQTLs in Arabidopsis thaliana, our result can be a reference resource of sQTLs for its neighboring species.