The biological literature is characterized by a heavy use of domain-specific terminology. In this analysis, our data set consisted of references to numerous genes in the 499 publications listed in Genomics & Informatics. Thus, the frequency of gene names is an excellent measure of trends in the academic papers published in this journal.
Initially, we extracted all papers tagged as describing the structure, function, or location of a human gene or the protein it encodes. Sorting through the records, we compiled a list of the most-studied genes in the journal. This list shows trends in research, revealing how concerns about specific diseases or health issues have shifted research priorities in the academic community towards the genes underlying these conditions.
Fig. 1 shows the top 10 genes studied in Genomics & Informatics: EGFR, BRCA1, TP53, PIK3CA, BRCA2, PTEN, GAPDH, TNF, FTO, and APC. The list is ranked based on how many papers mentioned each gene name. For example, BRCA1 appeared 85 times in 19 different publications, according to Fig. 1. Considering that many genes have only appeared once in the journal, these remarkable frequency differences may reflect differences in the importance of genes. In line with this reasoning, the most-studied human genes are related to human diseases. Almost all the most-studied genes are highly related to cancer, with the exception of GAPDH, a housekeeping gene. For example, the involvement of p110α, which is encoded by PIK3CA, in human cancer has been hypothesized since 1995, and PIK3CA started to appear in later volumes of the journal [4]. TP53 is a well-known tumor suppressor that is widely known to be mutated in roughly half of all human cancers. BRCA mutations, in either the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, are also a well-known category of mutations, as women with harmful mutations in either BRCA1 or BRCA2 are known to have a risk of breast or ovarian cancer that is roughly five to 30 times the normal risk [5]. Fig. 2 shows the temporal dynamics of these top 10 genes over the last 16 years.
Compared with the list of the top 10 most popular genes in recent publications in Nature News (TP53, TNF, EGFR, VEGFA, APOE, IL6, TGFB1, MTHFR, ESR1, and AKT1) [6], the top 10 list of Genomics & Informatics shares several gene names. The observed dynamics may result from a simple process—namely, authors naturally publish on genes that have already appeared in other publications. This might be a rewarding strategy for authors, because there is a positive correlation between the frequency of a gene in scientific publications and the impact of related publications as assessed through journal metrics.
We also surveyed genes and proteins of non-human species. The list of the most frequent organism names appearing in Genomics & Informatics is as follows: Escherichia coli (218 times), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (73 times), Caenorhabditis elegans (37 times), Acinetobacter baumannii (23 times), Drosophila melanogaster (18 times), Xenopus tropicalis (15 times), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (15 times), Sus scrofa (14 times), Oryza sativa (13 times), Bos taurus (12 times), and Arabidopsis thaliana (12 times). Other species that appeared in the journal included: Hepacivirus C, Rattus norvegicus, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Mus musculus, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Danio rerio, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Takifugu rubripes, Dictyostelium discoideum, Xenopus laevis, Plasmodium falciparum, Zea mays, and many others.
However, it is less clear how the genes of these species were chosen by authors, and no clear relationship was observed between the popularity of a gene from non-human species and its importance to cellular processes. This indicates that in the case of species other than humans, the emergence of highly popular genes is not necessarily driven by importance alone, but also by other mechanisms, such as conventions and the individual author’s research field.