In RAW cells and primary macrophages, LPS-induced signaling is mainly passed through the activation of the NF-κB/IκB kinase (IKK) pathways. The p50 and RelA complex mediates the majority of genes induced by LPS. In our studies, many induced genes appeared to be activated as a primary consequence of initial NF-κB activation. Although the induction of the genes was through the NF-κB pathway, few genes were differentially expressed when we combined the ligands. We have restricted our studies to 2 h; hence, we can not emphasize on the secondary sequences of NF-κB, but we observed that most of the induced genes have putative or known AP-1 or IRF-3 sites. The gene expression in dual treatment of IFN-β and KDO was specifically mediated by STAT proteins and NF-κB. Also, gene transcription during macrophage activation through TLR4 and the elevation of IFN-β simultaneously resulted in alterations in the chromatin structure of gene promoters that further influenced transcription initiation events.
Combining IFN-β and KDO induced the IFN-β secondary responsive genes Gbp1, Gbp2, and Gbp5 by more than 4-fold, but it attenuated several KDO secondary responsive genes, including Socs5, Cish, Fosl, Rgs16, Cxcr9, Ifit3, and Ctf1. In contrast, dual KDO and IFN-β treatment enhanced the expression of several transcription factors after 60 and 120 min of stimulation, most notably Atf3. Atf3 is a stress-inducible member of the Atf/Creb transcription factor family [47], and according to a recent systems biological approach, Atf3 negatively regulates TLR4-induced Il-6 and Il-12 transcription [48]. As evident from our QRT-PCR results, IFN-β never regulated MyD88-independent genes except Il-10. However, IFN-β treatment during TLR4 signaling increased Rantes, Il-10, and Tnf levels. It is interesting to note that that there should be a competition for the common signaling repressors and activators of the inflammatory ligand TNF and anti-inflammatory ligand Il-10 at approximately 4 h of signaling. It is also worthwhile to note that if TNF pathways dominate, it should lead to increased Il-10-repressed genes and direct the cells into the apoptosis pathway.
In addition to this effect, we observed upregulation but not enhanced levels of NF-κB p105, implicating this subunit in KDO and IFN-β responses not only through IκB-NF-κB interaction but also through transcriptional regulation. The elevated KDO and IFN-β primary and secondary responsive genes were not unexpected, considering that we observed higher NF-κB signaling and endogenous production of IFN-β under double-ligand stimulation. This suggests that there exists some crosstalk and pathway modulation in a positive way that increased the levels of gene expression.
Macrophages, when infected with pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria, lead to the induction of about 1,000 genes, and almost all of these genes were reported to be induced only though the TLR4 signaling cascade. Excessive production of cytokines or inflammatory agents is always associated with sepsis and shock. The data presented in our microarray also show that KDO and LPS induce identical gene expression profiles. This suggests that the contribution of other family members of TLR is minor, and TLR4 on the whole contributes to KDO-induced gene expression changes. Further, most of these gene responses were mediated by the MyD88-dependent pathway, which is essential for the optimal induction of many well-established cytokines, like Il-1, TNF, Il-10, Il-12, and Il-6. On the other hand, in our microarray studies, we observed that Tnf and other inflammatory genes were downregulated by 8-Br, whereas upregulated Il-10 levels. However, in double-ligand treatment, KDO abrogated all the gene responses of 8-Br. cAMP-dependent and -independent signaling mechanisms may be involved in mediating the gene regulation during double-ligand stimulation with KDO and 8-Br.
Another observation was the differential regulation of mRNAs of Il-1β, Il-1α, and Tnf by KDO and 8-Br. Ccl3, Ccl4, Il-1β, Tnf-α, and Gadd45β are the genes whose promoters have been proven to be regulated by RelA [49]. In our studies, all these genes were found to be upregulated at 60 min of KDO treatment, which is consistent with a previous report [50]. However, 8-Br increased Il-1β levels, but it did not increase Tnf levels. Both genes are regulated through the MyD88-dependent signaling. On the other hand, there was no change in Il-1α levels. In double-ligand stimulation, all these changes were reversed. We tried to find answers through the promoter and transcription factor search analysis. Transcription factors evolved to regulate the gene expression, and they have the ability to modify the expression of a given gene. Since Tnf is downregulated by 8-Br at 60 min itself, it should be happening either at the promoter level or at the primary pathway level. Although Tnf has AP1 binding sites, it is not sufficient to induce Tnf mRNA, whereas NF-κB is necessary for its upregulation. 8-Br should have affected the translocation of p65/p50 subunit to the nucleus.
Il-1β is highly expressed in activated macrophages and monocytes, and LPS is a well-established stimulus for its induction. Il-1β has one or more CREB binding sites in the promoter. Since 8-Br activates CREB, the presence of one or more CREB sites seems to be sufficient for its induction. On the other hand, Il-1α mRNA level was not changed. With the information available on its regulation, it seems that the AP1 site is necessary for its induction. 8-Br-induced pathways may have either directly or indirectly affected AP1 translocation to the nucleus. In this context, to support our notion, we observed the downregulation of some AP1 genes. 8-Br-induced pathways modulated the MAPK pathway, which must have happened as a dual channel. First, 8-Br may have inhibited the pathway upstream of AP1. Second, it should have inhibited the translocation of the specific subunits of AP1 into the nucleus. Gene regulation studies of 8-Br suggest the following mechanism of the pathway activation/repression: 1) 8-Br affected NF-κB activity directly; 2) 8-Br-induced CREB is sufficient to induce Il-1β expression; and 3) 8-Br affected the different subunits of AP1 specifically, and at the same time, it inhibited the pathway of MAPK upstream of AP1.
PDEs are enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of cAMP and cGMP, inactivating these second messengers [51]. PDE consists of 11 families, and amongst them four, including PDE4, PDE7, and PDE8, are cAMP-specific [52]. PDE4 isoforms are major inactivators of cAMP signaling [53]. In our studies, stimulation of TLR caused a major upregulation of PDE4B but not the paralogs PDE4A or PDE4D. Ablation of PDE4B impacted LPS signaling, and TNF-α mRNA and protein were decreased by >50% in PDE4B-/- but not in PDE4A-/- or PDE4D-/- macrophages [54]. This indicates the powerful role of PDE4B in macrophages, by inhibiting cAMP and its critical role in LPS signaling. Another possible explanation for this pathway modulation is the interaction between NF-κB and PKA. Since the catalytic subunit of PKA works as a complex with NF-κB/IκB in the inactive state [55], stimuli that degrade IκB also activate the associated PKA catalytic subunit, which promotes the phosphorylation of p65 at Ser 276 and increases the transcriptional activity of NF-κB. Two GPCR ligands, isoproterenol and prostaglandin E2, induce cAMP through the activation of Gαs and adenylate cyclase. cAMP production inhibits pro-inflammatory mediators, including TNF and nitric oxide in RAW 264.7 cells [56, 57]. Apart from this, multiple signaling pathways or mechanisms are likely to be involved in mediating gene responses to KDO and 8-Br. In some cases, an increase in cAMP level by pituitary adenylate cyclase blocks IκB degradation, p65/Rel translocation, and/or the rearrangement of CREB/Jun/CREB-binding protein (CBP) complexes [58]. In other cases, an increase in cAMP is directly proportional to the decrease in MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) kinase pathways [59], and transactivating properties of PKA are reported to be involved in NF-κB activation [60].
After 60 min, triple-ligand treatment upregulated many transcription factors, such as Nr4a2, Crem, Atf3, Irf8, Nfkbp100, Egr2, Egr1, Cish, Stat3, Stat2, Irf1, and FosB. After 120 min of stimulation, we observed upregulated zinc finger and BTB domain-containing 32 (Zbtb32), Fosl1, RelB, Irf7, LPS-induced TNF-α factor (Litaf), and Jundm2. Although the regulatory mechanisms of these genes are complex, they all culminate in the production of various pro-inflammatory cytokines. NIH3T3 cells, when stimulated with the cAMP analog forskolin, activate p38 by PKA, which in turn phosphorylates CREB through RSK2. However, this process is delayed in comparison with the direct phosphorylation of CREB by PKA [61]. This study shows that there exist crosstalk mechanisms between PKA and p38, thus allowing the cells to prolong the incoming signal. Both LPS and the cAMP analog 8-Br activate p38, like forskolin, forming the crosstalk points between GPCR and Toll-like receptor. This mechanism would have partly contributed to the observed dominant gene signature of KDO in triple-ligand studies. We also noted that there exist substantial differences in the gene expression profiles of RAW 264.7 cells and primary macrophages. For example, TNF alpha is produced highly in RAW 264.7 cells than in macrophages, and there are quantitative and temporal differences between these cells.
The KDO-induced gene signature dominated over IFN-β and the 8-Br-induced gene signature. In addition, we also explained the genes that have the ability to act as positive (Tnf, Il-1) [62, 63] and negative feedback (Il-1ra) [64] regulators of KDO signaling. Excessive activation of cytokines is associated with septic shock and clinical consequences of inflammatory disorders. It is also of interest that many genes induced by 8-Br have the potential to act as anti-inflammatory actions. Thus, our studies prove that elevating intracellular cAMP levels during the times of immunological stress might ameliorate the shock-induced mortality.
Taken together, our study identified several target genes that are activated/repressed by KDO, IFN-β, and/or 8-Br in RAW 264.7 cells. Based on these data, we also proposed regulatory signaling networks that could be responsible for the crosstalk between Toll-like receptors and non-Toll-like receptors, such as GPCRs. These findings not only highlight the decisive regulation of various genes by three important ligands but also add depth to our broad understanding of biological signaling connections between complex systems of functionally interacting macromolecules. Gene responses in macrophages to LPS vary between different methylation patterns [65], sub-clones of RAW 264.7 cells [66], chromatin structure of gene promoters, and chromatin remodeling events [67]. To define the action of a given ligand, it is necessary to rule out these options and particularly emphasize on the true effects of a ligand. Though our studies form the basis for the novel regulatory pathways of gene induction during macrophage action, future studies are warranted to construct a signaling map.