RNA modifications change the biochemical composition of RNA molecules and affect their structure and metabolism. RNA modifications are called the “epitranscriptome,” meaning that they are forms of post-transcriptional alterations that do not affect the RNA sequence, in analogy to how the term “epigenome” describes functionally relevant changes that do not involve changes in the DNA sequence [27]. Recent studies have revealed that many of these modifications are remarkably widespread across the genome, evolutionarily conserved, and functionally important. More than 100 distinct types of RNA modifications have been identified. Most RNA modifications do not change nucleotides, but RNA editing is accompanied by a change in the RNA sequence itself. One of the common examples is the deamination of adenosine (A) to inosine (I), which is recognized as guanosine (G) in RNA sequencing. The A-to-I editing is mediated by the adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs) protein family, which prefers double-stranded RNA structure [28] (Fig. 2B). The edited sites are mostly found in noncoding regions of RNA, which may have regulatory potential. RNA editing of the protein-coding sequence can result in the expression of functionally altered proteins. In addition, the editing can have an impact on RNA splicing, indicating the interplay of these mechanisms [29]. The biological consequences of RNA editing are broadly linked to RNA metabolism and function, including mRNA stability, splicing, nuclear export, and localization [30].
As mentioned, A-to-I editing is detectable from RNA-Seq data by modifying the analysis pipeline. A prediction should be carefully made due to frequent false positives arising from single-nucleotide polymorphisms or sequencing errors. This limitation has been overcome in recent years by developing bioinformatics methods for accurate predictions. By comparing genomic DNA and RNA sequencing data from the same individuals, the biological noise from genomic polymorphisms could be reduced. Technical noise caused by sequencing errors and incorrect alignment can be removed by focusing on high-quality reads. Public databases collecting well-annotated edited sites are also useful for reliable screening and functional annotation [31,32]. In the near future, new platforms such as nanopore sequencing will solve current technical hurdles by allowing direct detection of editing in full-length RNA molecules [33].
Recent advances in RNA editing research have contributed to scientists’ understanding of the mechanisms involved in human cancers through the accumulation of evidence of mutated peptides induced by RNA editing [34,35]. Through an integrated analysis of TCGA genomic data and CPTAC proteomic data, Peng et al. showed that A-to-I RNA editing made a notable contribution to increased protein diversity in human cancers [36]. According to their analysis, a considerable number of editing events lead to changes in the amino acid sequence, indicating the possibility that A-to-I editing may be a source of producing mutated peptides. More direct evidence of RNA editing for neoantigen production was reported in recent research by Zhang et al. [6]. Using proteogenomics screening, they identified five edited peptides and confirmed their tumor association and their immunogenicity regarding T cell recognition and killing. In addition, they showed experimental evidence responsible for the biological mechanism of RNA editing depending on ADAR expression. In addition to cancer research, Roth et al.[37] provided evidence that RNA editing is significantly increased in systemic lupus erythematosus patients, promoting autoimmune progression by increasing the autoantigenic load.