In principle, xenografts of human tumor tissue onto mice would be an ideal tool for testing the response in vivo to anticancer drugs for individual patients, because PDX models preserve the main characteristics of the original tumor, such as mutation profile and morphology [15]. However, it is unclear whether the characteristics of the mutations in the primary tumor are well preserved in the mouse xenograft or not. In this study, we aimed to check whether the genetic alterations that are identified in primary tumors are consistent with the corresponding PDX xenograft tumors using CRC PDX models. For this, we compared the genetic alteration profiles for three pairs of primary CRCs and their corresponding PDX tumors. To rule out the passage effect of mutation profiles in the PDX model, we used passage-three samples for all three CRCs. Through this analysis, we observed that most of the key somatic mutations (14/17) were preserved in the xenograft. In terms of the consistency of the somatic mutations, two of the three CRC cases showed perfectly consistent mutation profiles between the primary tumor and xenograft, and the other case showed a partly consistent profile. Overall, 14 of the 17 (82.4%) somatic mutations that were identified in the three CRCs were consistent between the primary tumor and xenograft. This result is largely consistent with previous observations in diverse cancers [16, 17]. In addition to the somatic mutations, the CNA profiles were also largely consistent between the primary tumor and xenograft. All of these data suggest that the PDX tumor model preserves the majority of key mutations that are detected in the primary tumor site. This study provides evidence that the PDX model is useful for testing target therapies in the clinical field and research on precision medicine.
There are several limitations in this study. First, the number of cases might not have been enough to conclude the consistency of key genetic mutations between the primary tumor and xenograft objectively. Second, due to the limited sample size, some of the common driver mutations for CRCs, such as RAS mutation, were unable to be compared. Third, the cancer panel was not suitable to analyze the CNAs properly. Therefore, although the CNA profiles were largely consistent between the primary tumor and xenograft, these data are not objective and solid evidence to support the consistency of the CNA profiles.
In conclusion, we performed targeted sequencing using a custom panel in both a primary tumor and PDX tumor for colorectal cancer. We identified that the PDX models had consistent genetic characteristics, including key driver genes that were identified in the primary tumors. Our data are useful evidence to support the application of PDX models for precision medicine research and future clinical applications.