The 11.2% failure rate (974 barcodes) of validation was unexpectedly high. The phenomenon happened simply because we only analyzed high-fidelity barcodes. When barcodes of lower fidelity that was confirmed only on either side were counted, the success rate increased to 95%. The results suggest that all of the sequenced barcodes did not locate properly because of many causes, including imperfect genome sequence information, redundancy among ORFs (e.g., wtf), and ambiguous PCR products due to sequence defects in PCR priming sites [9]. Therefore, usage of another sequencing method, such as NGS, would increase the success rate of the barcode validation up to ＞95%, as with budding yeast [10], because NGS technology directly counts barcode sequences without PCR amplification.
The overall mutation frequency (16.6%) in the fission yeast barcodes was similar to that in budding yeast (∼18%) [10]. In detail, the overall rates of deletions and insertions were within reasonable ranges, compared with previous results in budding yeast [9, 10]. However, the substitution rate (702 mutated barcodes, 67.6%) in fission yeast was unexpectedly high compared with budding yeast (∼28%). Moreover, it was well above the predicted error frequency from the raw Sanger sequencing data [16]: 0.1% occurrence per each base position or ca. 2% occurrence within a 20-mer tag. In addition, the high substitution rate might come from intrinsic errors during the solid-phase oligonucleotide chemical synthesis. For example, a single-nucleotide deletion might be expected to occur randomly due to periodic de-blocking failure during the oligonucleotide synthesis. In contrast, substitutions and insertions are less likely to arise during oligonucleotide synthesis, because they should come from mechanical or software errors. However, contamination of the reagents would give rise to a substitution rate of ＜0.2% per base position or a 4% occurrence within a 20-mer tag. Another explanation for a substitution rate (16.6%) higher than 6% might come from nucleotide misincorporation error (1/103‒104) of Taq polymerase during PCR amplification of the barcode regions. In addition, extra errors might come from errors in base-calling, because only Sanger sequencing technology was used. This will be clarified by additional analyses using NGS technology, which are underway at the moment.
Intriguingly, the sequence mutation of each base position showed a gradient difference within a 20-mer barcode in a similar manner as in budding yeast [9]. Generally, the phenomenon is consistent with a decrease in the fidelity of the oligonucleotide chemical synthesis, depending on the distance from the first position at the 3ˊ-end of each synthetic oligonucleotide. However, the prominent high occurrence at position number 1 is difficult to explain. There is no reason why position 1 had a peculiarly high mutation rate in common, because the 20-mer barcode sequences were located inside the 75-mer oligonucleotide primers used for PCR amplification of the KanMX module in both budding and fission yeasts.
Incorporation of unique barcode tags into the fission yeast gene deletion library has enabled the identification of gene functions by parallel growth fitness analysis [8]. However, the assay system requires renovation of either mutated barcodes or mismatched array sequences, which carry significant up-front costs. To circumvent the expensive situation, an NGS approach is preferred over fixing the previous microarray platform. NGS analysis directly counts each barcode in a complex sample via sequencing using a protocol, called “Barcode Analysis by Sequencing,” or “Bar-seq.” Together, well-defined barcode sequences, combined with the NGS platform, promise to make the fission yeast gene deletion library a powerful tool for understanding gene function. In this regard, the results in this study are a basis for upgrade of the parallel analysis from the previous microarray technology to NGS technology.