There have been various experimental studies regarding enzyme activity [1,2]. Enzyme activity is defined by a measure of the quantity of active enzyme present. Most enzyme activity studies are based on in vitro experiments. This approach is a limited method because it does not contain in vivo situations. Our approach was to introduce transcript capacity (TC) concept and this concept has both resemblance and difference in comparison to the enzyme activity estimation. It can be considered that TC plays a role like enzyme activity as transcript activity or TC but it is mainly related to the analyzed traits. Thus, TC does not match to the concept of enzyme activity, perfectly. Although enzyme activity is not directly associated with TC, the investigation of TC can be one of the important route to examine enzyme activity because both deal with the capacity of specific cellular units, i.e. enzyme and transcript. We calculated TC using the genome-wide association study (GWAS) beta effect and transcript reads in RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data, and our study is based on an in silico analysis. Our novel approach was based on that gene effect could be a function of TC and transcript reads. TC refers to the capacity that one unit of transcripts exerts as a cellular function. TC cannot be easily measured in experiments. We calculated TC using bioinformatics studies.
GWAS can be used for finding significant variants and genes associated with given traits. It is a very efficient and powerful method for detecting genes of significance. GWAS has been used to discover disease-associated genes and quantitative trait loci genes [3-5]. Lu et al. [6] tried to discover new loci associated with body fat percent (BF%) and identified cardiometabolic disease risk genomic factors. For TC estimation, we used BF% as the phenotype and performed GWAS. The beta effect in GWAS denotes the coefficient of the regression model and it can be the additive effect of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the GWAS [7-9]. The significant markers associated with phenotypes have been used as the significance of the encompassed genes in GWAS. This is plausible because SNPs is linked at those encompassing genes which are usually called “linkage disequilibrium.”
RNA-seq data provides transcripts’ reads [10,11]. Through transcript reads and gene effects, we calculated TC. TC analysis can be important because it can be further analyzed the enzyme activity if the protein expression level instead of transcript reads is given.