Research combining biology and clinical information must address "the storage, retrieval, analysis, and dissemination of molecular information in a clinical setting," as suggested by the America Medical Informatics Association (AMIA)-initiated genomics working group [11]. The AMIA proposed specific areas as follows: 1) development of a database structure to unify clinical and genomic data, 2) connecting biology information with patient health records, 3) development of a genome-enabled EMR system, 4) linking clinical trial and drug discovery information, 5) supporting the development benchmark clinical/molecular datasets, 6) developing clinical decision-support tools utilizing molecular information, and 7) visualizing and modeling the molecular basis of disease.
The major challenge is how to integrate the heterogeneous data into one database system. Should there be a single database or should one consider a federated model? Furthermore, one should consider various cases by various users, which would determine the overall system architecture. It is not possible to move large amounts of genomic data. Then, how and where should the high-intensity computation be managed? The expected raw sequencing data for one person is approximately 4 terabytes. The integrated database can have a potential impact on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease. To make this desire come true, it is important to connect genomics data with clinical information. Genetic test results are already used to assess the risk of breast cancer patients, determine the potential adverse drug reactions on individual patient metabolism, and identify treatment plans for cancers. Genetic test results have suggested a diagnosis for patients with neuropathy, inflammatory bowel disease, and Proteus syndrome and have guided therapeutic care for patients with arterial calcifications, movement disorders, and Miller syndrome [12-17]. The number of applications of genomics in diagnosing diseases and guiding treatment procedures in the clinic will continue to increase.