In this study, the AFT UM-MDR method was proposed by extending the UM-MDR method to the survival phenotype. In the first step, the standardized residual of the accelerated failure time model is used to classify the multi-level genotypes into high-risk and low-risk, as done in AFT-MDR, and a binary variable is defined for indicating the high-risk group. Then, in the second step, the significance test for an indicator for the high-risk group, defined in the first step, is conducted in the framework of the regression model, as done in UM-MDR. The big advantage of the proposed method over AFT-MDR is that it can test the significance of gene-gene interactions without intensive permutation procedures. Thus, the computing time is substantially reduced, and it is also flexible enough to consider the main genetic effect, as well as gene-gene interactions, in a model. Throughout the simulation studies, it is shown that the proposed method performs better than AFT-MDR for both with and without the main effect. These powers tend to increase as the heritability increases but decrease as MAF changes from 0.2 to 0.4 and the censoring fraction increases. Especially, the power of AFT-MDR is almost 0 under a model with a main effect, which implies that the gene-gene interaction can not be detected by AFT-MDR when any main genetic effect exists. On the other hand, the proposed method still detects gene-gene interactions, even when there is any main genetic effect. Interestingly, the censoring fraction critically affects the power when the main effect is considered, because the trend of the three powers seems to be robust over the censoring fraction when the main effect is not considered, as shown in Fig. 2.
As mentioned in Yu et al. [9], the UM-MDR is very flexible in the sense that various classification rules can be applied. We have an ongoing study in extending the UM-MDR to the Cox model, in which the martingale residual of a Cox model is used as a classification rule, as done in Cox-MDR.