Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences that are capable of integrating into the genome at a new site within the cell of its origin. Sometimes, the change in their positions creates or reverses mutations, thereby altering the cell's genotype. Barbara McClintock's discovery of these "jumping genes" earned her a Nobel Prize in 1983 [1]. TEs are prevalent in all plants and animals. In mammals, TEs and their remnants make up almost half of the genome, and in some plants, they constitute up to 90% of the genome [2]. TEs consist of two major classes: DNA transposons and retrotransposons. DNA transposons are capable of moving and inserting into new genomic sites [3]. Although they are currently not mobile in the human genome, they were active during early primate evolution until ~37 million years ago (Mya) [4]. Retrotransposons replicate by forming RNA intermediates, which are then reverse-transcribed to make DNA sequences and inserted into new genomic locations [4]. Based on the presence of long terminal repeats (LTRs), retrotransposons are further classified into two groups: LTR and non-LTR transposons. In humans, LTR elements are called human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs). It is estimated that HERVs inserted into the human genome >25 Mya [5, 6]. Non-LTR retrotransposons include long interspersed element 1 (LINE-1 or L1), Alu, and SVA elements. Studies have revealed that these are the only TEs that are currently active in humans [7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
TEs have driven genome evolution in multiple ways. Retrotransposons comprise a large proportion of the genome, especially in plants and mammals. The effect of the increase in retrotransposons has been tolerated during evolution. Accumulating literature has proven that mobile elements are useful tools for studying genome evolution and gene function [12]. A comparative analysis has shown that the human genome makes 655 perfect full-length matches with vertebrate TEs. TE insertions have been shown to have many effects, such as regulation of gene expression, increased recombination rate, and unequal crossover. TE insertions have caused many effective changes in the human genome, and the selected changes have been responsible for the evolution of the human lineage [13]. The human genome contains many recently inserted active TEs, such as AluYa5, AluYb8, and AluYc1. Alu elements are a family of primate-specific short interspersed DNA elements. Various studies have proposed that Alu element insertions have created many variants that can potentially be used as DNA markers in human population studies, as well as in forensic analyses. Kass et al. [14] have identified an Alu-based polymorphism that consists of four alleles, from which the evolutionary order can be predicted.
The effects of TEs on genetic instability and human diseases have not been thoroughly studied. The mobile property of TEs is the reason for their mutational potential. TE insertions may create a broad range of effects on humans, ranging from silent mutations to alternative splicing. Both insertions and excisions of TEs can cause genomic instability, thus causing many human diseases, including genetic disorders, psychiatric problems, and cancer [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. Furthermore, TE insertions may result in insertional mutations, non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR), creation of novel regulatory sequences, and epigenetic changes [22]. A large number of human diseases that are associated with NAHR between Alu elements have been reported [22]. Technical advances have helped to detect TE-associated diseases and develop novel biomarkers for clinical diagnostics. Computational tools have been developed to study the dynamics of transposition at a population level, thus providing critical insights into the mechanisms behind genome evolution. Finally, combining the genomic materials from diverse individuals followed by high-throughput sequencing can enhance the significance of characterizing genomic polymorphisms in a population [23].
In this review, we will provide updates on our current understanding of the roles of TEs in genome evolution and genetic instability. Further, we focus on how their activity affects gene expression and causes disease states in human beings.