The expression of functional product of a gene is a foundation of modern biotechnology. Sixty-one codons to translate 20 amino acids and three codons to stop translation are employed in the genetic code. These codons are deciphered in the ribosome by complementary tRNAs that are attached with the proper amino acids [1]. The degeneracy of the genetic code enables same protein to be translated by many alternate nucleotide sequences. The frequency of different codons varies significantly between different organisms, and also between highly and lowly expressed genes in the same organism. There is a continuing speculation regarding the factors which influence these codon preferences. Attempts have been made to explain the codon distributions in protein coding genes as well as the variations in codon usages as mutation-selection stability among different synonymous codons in each organism [23]. Researchers have assumed that codon bias which tends to diminish the diversity of isoacceptor tRNAs may decrease the metabolic load [45]. Whatever may be the reason behind codon usage bias, it has gradually developed the idea that codon bias can have a thoughtful influence on the expression of genes. The equilibrium between mutation and natural selection on translational efficiency is supposed to cause of codon bias [67] and stronger relative codon usage bias (RCB) in highly expressed genes than lowly expressed genes is anticipated due to the natural selection [8]. The recent technical advances e.g., cDNA microarray, Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE), etc. are large-scale, high-throughput experimental methods which need material and information processing systems to match. Furthermore, a massive investment of time and resources put an obstacle before the investigators. Thus, to identify the highly expressed genes in vast majority of organisms, researchers were looked beyond the direct experimental methods. So, predicting gene expression level using computational approaches rather than experimental is more interesting because it evades expensive and laborious experiment.
It is observed that highly expressed genes will preferably choose an optimal subset of codons identified by the most abundant tRNA and highly expressed genes are often depicted by strong codon usage bias [910111213141516]. Based on this hypothesis, a variety of gene expression measures like Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) [17], Relative Codon Adaptation (RCA) [18], Relative Codon Bias Strength (RCBS) [192021] which compute codon usage bias in genes are currently in use, and hence provide numerical indices to predict the expression levels of genes. Calculation of CAI score depends on the knowledge of codon bias of highly expressed genes. However, the determination of set of highly expressed gene is major problem to calculate CAI and CAI is also relatively noisy in the short region to capture local codon bias pattern [2223]. Although the determination of set of highly expressed gene is not required for calculating score of RCBS, but RCBS has partial dependence on gene length (for genes having length < 300 aa) [18]. Like CAI, RCA also depends on the knowledge of codon bias of highly expressed genes and it also depends on the size of the reference set because relative frequency is used to calculate relative adaptation of the codons [2425]. In order to overcome the problems of partial dependence on gene length and determination of selective highly expressed genes as a reference set, we proposed here an alternative model (Modified Relative Codon Bias Strength [MRCBS]) to predict the expression levels of genes from their codon compositions. It has no length dependence on the gene size and uses codon usage of ribosomal protein (RP) genes which are believed to be highly expressed genes [1112] as a reference set for our calculation. To measure the predictive performance of the methodology, we compared the performances of several commonly used measures in this work.
Here, we investigated the gene expression and the variation in patterns of synonymous codon usage across the crenarchaeal genomes. Crenarchaeota is one of the four phyla of Archaea and includes both cold-dwelling and hyperthermophilic prokaryotes. The cold-dwelling Crenarchaeota have been recognized only as community samples of 16S ribosomal RNA from the marine environments. The hyperthermophilic species of Crenarchaeota, some of which have the ability to grow at up to 113℃, have been isolated from geothermally heated soils, waters containing elemental sulfur and sulfides, or hydrothermal vents [26]. At higher temperatures, bioleaching rates of thermophilic organisms surpass their low temperature microbial counterparts and subsequently significant research interest grows to use of these organisms for biomining applications [27]. Cold-dwelling organisms survives extremely low temperature and uses antifreeze proteins (AFP) for their development and existence in subzero environments. AFPs can be applied in the field of aquaculture, agriculture, cryopreservation, cryosurgery, and food storage [2829]. Metabolically, Crenarchaeota which are quite diverse and varying from chemoorganotrophs to chemolithoautotrophs, include anaerobes, facultative anaerobes or aerobes, and many of them employ sulfur in some way for energy metabolism [30]. Numerous species use carbon dioxide as only carbon source to produce organic matter, and procure energy by the oxidation of inorganic substances like sulfur and hydrogen, and reduction of sulfur or nitrate. Some species develop on organic substrates by aerobic or anaerobic respiration or by fermentation. The most remarkable property of the Crenarchaeota is their survival in the environment involving extremes of acidity and temperature.
These uncommon features of Crenarchaeota have fascinated the research interest of evolutionary biologists and biotechnology companies. The environment when first life emerged on the early Earth can be thought similar to the extreme conditions of the environment under which Crenarchaeota reside currently. This information proposes that first forms of life on earth may be similar to Crenarchaeota. Also, extreme resistance to heat and acid of cellular enzymes make Crenarchaeota very appealing to use in industry and research. Thus gene expression of crenarchaeal genomes is expected to make important contributions in several areas.