The concept of epistasis, generally defined as interactions among different genes, was first introduced in 1909 by William Bateson to describe the latent effect of one locus over another locus. A quantitative definition to the interaction was proposed in 1918 by R.A. Fisher as a statistical deviation from the additive effects of two loci on a phenotype. This definition enabled interaction analyses by testing whether products of multiple genotypes are statistically associated with phenotypes. More definitions about the gene-gene interaction have been proposed, but some are still not clearly understood. The statistical gene-gene interaction has often been confused with a biological gene-gene interaction. Particularly, the inference on a biological mechanism is complicated because of the lack of direct correspondence between statistical and biological interactions [1]. In general, statisticians define a statistical interaction as a departure from additivity in a linear model using a selected measurement scale [2]. However, as was pointed by Wang et al. [3], if one aims to infer biological interactions, statistically modeled interactions and main effect terms should not be interpreted separately [2]. In this paper, we detected gene-gene interactions with a likelihood ratio test. Genotype scores for single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) pairs were considered nominal variables, and nine different levels were assumed for a full model. For a reduced model, we considered three levels for each SNP, and thus, our likelihood ratio tests followed a chi-square distribution with 4 degrees of freedom. Therefore, the proposed method can detect biological interactions. It should be noted that biological interactions include statistical interactions.
The method of detecting gene-gene interactions has attracted much attention in genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Including logistic regression analysis for detecting gene-gene interactions, new methods, like comparing linkage disequilibrium (LD) in case and control groups, have been recently proposed [4]. However, analyzing a large number of SNPs in a GWAS is computationally very intensive, and various approaches, such as MDR [5], BEAM [6], Random Jungle [7], PLINK [8], and BOolean Operation-based Screening and Testing (BOOST), have been proposed to enable gene-gene interactions on a genome-wide scale.
In this paper, we considered BOOST method, proposed by Wan et al. [9]. BOOST uses a non-iteratively estimated measure that is approximately equal to the maximum likelihood estimators for a log-linear model, and it is used to select pairs of SNPs with a specified threshold. There is an updated method, graphical processing units BOOST (GBOOST), which is a BOOST method implemented for a graphical processing units framework for enabling parallel computing to achieve massive assignment in a fast manner [10]. GBOOST achieves a 40-fold speedup compared with BOOST. However, in the algorithm of BOOST, covariates other than SNPs can not be considered. We need a more flexible approach to improve the power of the model.
Here, we propose an efficient strategy that combines the BOOST screening stage and logistic regression method. Logistic regression generally shows good statistical power for a wide spectrum of epistasis. Screening with BOOST is a computationally efficient screening method, and a genome-wide search can be completed within a few hours. A follow-up stage of logistic regression with covariates would improve the statistical power of the model. In this paper, we first review the BOOST method and apply the proposed two-stage approach to type 2 diabetes (T2D) in a Korean population. This analysis of gene-gene interactions on a genome-wide scale with BOOST was completed within 42 hours, and we also identified several pairs of SNPs associated with T2D.
T2D is the most common form of diabetes, and unlike people with type 1 diabetes, T2D patients make insulin. However, either their pancreas does not make enough insulin or the body cannot use the insulin well enough. The prevalence of T2D has increased rapidly in recent years. The prevalence of T2D in Korea was estimated to be 7.3% (in people over 20 years of age) in 2005, and the rate of patients with T2D is expected to increase dramatically from 7.08% in 2010 to about 10.85% by 2030 [11]. Even more and more children are being diagnosed with T2D. Environmental effects, like obesity and lack of physical activity, are two of the most common causes of T2D, and the increasing prevalence may be related with them. It is also known that T2D has considerable heritability, which indicates a genetic effect. Until now, genetic variants in nearly 70 loci have been identified for T2D. Some variants from genes, such as KCNQ1 [12], KCNJ11, PPARG, NRF1, IDE, TCF7L2, CDKAL1, HHEX, IGF2BP2, CDKN2A/B, and SLC30A8 [13], were reported as significant susceptible genes to T2D in the East Asian population. To detect the relation between gene-gene interactions and T2D phenotype, we performed a gene-gene interaction analysis with the proposed two-stage analysis. We analyzed 8,842 participants (4,183 males and 4,659 females) with 352,228 autosomal SNPs collected from the Korea Association Resource project (KARE). We found some promising gene-gene interactions with the proposed method, and they will be investigated further in our future follow-up studies.