Obesity is a disorder defined by excessive adiposity. Given that approximately 3 million people die due to complications from being overweight each year worldwide, the steadily increasing number of overweight individuals will pose a major threat to public health [1]. Notably, the prevalence of obesity in children has increased in recent years, and addressing childhood obesity has become one of the major challenges in the field of public health.
In addition to a number of modifiable risk factors, including the social and cultural environment of an individual, certain genetic factors can contribute to an increased susceptibility to obesity. Genome-wide association studies have identified several candidate genomic variants on the LEP (leptin), IGF2, and POMC genes [23]. However, such variants are observed in only a minority of obese individuals, leaving a majority of obese people without the identification of causal genomic factors [4]. Moreover, some studies failed to identify a strong association between the development of obesity in children and in their parents [56]. Thus, the causal role of genetics in the etiology of childhood obesity is unclear, suggesting that non-genetic factors, including behavioral or environmental ones, should be taken into account.
Recently, the role of epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of multifactorial disorders, including obesity, has been recognized [7]. With the advent of high-throughput DNA methylation profiling technologies, it is now possible to discover novel genes and markers for the early screening and accurate diagnosis of obesity on a genome-wide scale. For example, Wang et al. [8] compared the DNA methylation profiles obtained from the peripheral blood cells of seven young obese and seven normal individuals using the Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip Kit, with a resolution of ~27,000 CpG sites. They identified a number of potential markers (e.g., CpG sites located at the promoters of UBASH3A and TRIM3) that showed differential methylation between obese and control individuals and subsequently validated the loci with pyrosequencing. Almen et al. [9] used the same chip to identify DNA methylation markers associated with both age and obesity. Since these genome-wide studies have mainly focused on marker discovery, in-depth genomic analyses (e.g., exploration of the relationship between differentially methylated CpG sites and other genomic features or gene expression) are still largely uninvestigated.
In this study, we performed genome-wide DNA methylation and transcriptome profiling of young obese individuals compared with healthy controls (n = 6 for both groups) to examine whether changes in DNA methylation or gene expression in peripheral blood cells could distinguish obese individuals from controls. For methylation profiling, we used the methylation microarray with the highest resolution currently available—the Illumina HumanMethylation450 platform, with a resolution of ~485,000 CpG sites—to ensure proper genomic correlative analyses. Recognizing that DNA methylation can be used as a predictive marker for obesity, we next performed genomic correlative analyses of the DNA methylation patterns obtained during profiling to identify enrichment patterns of CpG sites that were differentially methylated between obese and control individuals with respect to genes, CpG islands (CGIs), and epigenomic compartments. The putative functions of those genes harboring the differentially methylated CpGs were also investigated.