Many researchers have shown that formal language theory is an appropriate tool in analyzing various biological sequences [1, 2]. The hidden Markov model (HMM) is most closely related to regular grammars, because an n-gram is a subsequence of n items from a given sequence, and language models that are built from n-grams are actually (n-1)-order Markov models. However, the research of modeling biological sequences has usually focused on nucleotide or amino acid sequences that encode RNA or interact with proteins [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. On the other hand, noncoding DNA regions, which occupy approximately 98% of human DNA, have not been considered for HMM-based analysis. The reason is partially due to the fact that a large proportion of noncoding DNA has been believed to have no known biological functions.
However, recent technical advances, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq), DNase I hypersensitive sites sequencing (DNase-seq), formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE) [13, 14], and computational epigenetics, have started to convert unannotated noncoding DNA into highly annotated functional areas [15, 16]. The work is analogous to dissecting the region that constitutes the noncoding DNA and understanding the type of meaning each element contains. For this reason, the field of epigenetics has received a boost of attention and is currently among the fastest moving areas in molecular biology. However, epigenetic mechanisms are highly interwoven in a complex network of interactions. Disentangling this network is an important goal of epigenetic research. Thus, various bioinformatic challenges arise from the analysis of epigenetic data, and HMMs have played a significant role in solving important epigenetic problems, as HMMs are well suited to the task of discovering unobserved 'hidden' states from 'observed' sequences in their spatial genomic context.
In this paper, we give a tutorial review of the design of HMMs and their applications to solve various computational epigenetic problems. We selected three representative works to compare different designs of HMMs for various computational epigenetic problems: the Li et al. [17] two-hidden-state HMM to determine transcription factor binding sites, the Xu et al. [18] three-hidden-state HMM to compare histone modification sites, and the Ernst and Kellis [19] multi-state multivariate HMM to analyze systematic state dynamics of human cells. We want to clarify the fact that this review is by no means exhaustive and that there exist many other types of HMMs for computational epigenetic problems.