Information technology has developed so rapidly all over the world that smart devices have become popularized and digital contents have been diversified. As a consequence, internet addiction (IA) has become an important issue. Although the prevention and treatment of IA are more important than ever due to pervasive digital media and although measures to establish a systematic research environment and overcome addiction problems are more necessary than ever, unfortunately, these steps not progressing fast enough.
It has been known that IA leads to diverse psychosomatic problems, such as nonaggressive or oppositional behavior and hostility. In Korea, it was reported that 7% of internet users aged 5 to 54 years are at risk of IA, and the percentage keeps growing [1]. IA disorder, which has many similarities to psychopathological disorders, is on the rise and is considered a potential problem. Therefore, a diagnostic standard is required considering DNA, protein, and the characteristics of the structure of the brain.
Many studies have been conducted on genomes that affect addictions to substances, such as alcohol, and a considerable number of databases have been built up. However, a biological database of genes, proteins, and brain structures, which can be used directly for IA, is not sufficient.
To build a genome database related to IA, personal genome data, which are sensitive to handle, have to be examined, so security should be guaranteed. In addition, a medical information standard-based environment is very important in terms of security. It requires a medical information standard and access control technology for the service environment of genomic database [23].
Integration in the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) [4] is providing various types of standard guidelines to control access to medical information. IHE access control guidelines include cross-domain user authentication (XUA), enterprise user authentication (EUA) and internet user authentication (IUA) [5].
IUA provides the guidelines for access to OAuth 2.0-based medical information service. OAuth 2.0 [6] is an access control method that manages several services in a group with one integrated ID. It is used by Google and Facebook. Therefore, it provides easy scalability into medical systems and easy control of authority for access [7].
In this paper, we propose the medical standard-based IA Bioinformatics (IABio) database platform service, which can integrate the data on genes, proteins, and brain structure image data in internet and game addiction into one database. IABio follows medical standard-based guidelines and controls access to database using OAuth 2.0. Therefore, using IABio can provide a medical standard-based service environment and will allow various integrated research studies with an access control method that enables interchange with other clinical data.
The present study is composed as follows. Relevant studies and literature on this topic are described in section II. In section III, IABio is designed. In section IV, the designed IABio is explained. Our study closes with conclusions in section V.