Li et al. [17] developed a method to determine transcription factor binding sites from chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with DNA microarrays (ChIP-chip) experiments on an Affymetrix tiling array of chromosomes 21 and 22. Owing to the Affymetrix array characteristics and genome sequence similarity, probes with the same 25-mer sequence tend to be spotted at different locations on the chips. Two-stage procedures were employed to filter out short-range repetitive probe measurements prior to downstream analysis. Then, tiling array data from various experiments were gathered to normalize and model the behavior of each individual probe, where the behavior of each probe was modeled as a normal distribution. Finally, a two-hidden-state (ChIP-enriched state and nonenriched state) HMM was built to estimate the probability of enrichment at each probe location.
Given J potential binding sites along chromosomes covered by K total probes, the initial probabilities and transition probabilities of HMM were characterized, as in Fig. 3. Initial probabilities were set to J/K for the ChIP-enriched state and to 1 - J/K for the nonenriched state. Transition probabilities were set to J/K for transition to a different state and 1 - J/K for staying in the same state. The emission probability distribution of probe in a single dataset was set to N(µi + 2σi, (1.5σi)2) for the ChIP-enriched state and N(µi, σi2) for the nonenriched state (where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of probe i). The parameters were based on previous results with the Affymetrix SNP arrays [20].
Other methods that are based on two-state HMMs for the identification of methylated regions were proposed [22, 23, 24, 25]. A common characteristic of these studies is the modeling of two different populations of measurements to differentiate nonenriched regions from enriched ones. Ji and Wong [22] suggested TileMap, which is an effective statistical tool to identify genomic loci that show transcriptional or protein binding patterns of interest. Martin-Magniette et al. [23] proposed ChIP-mix, which is a statistical method based on the mixture of regression to classify probes in ChIP-chip experiments. Johannes et al. [24] presented a parametric classification method for genomewide comparisons of chromatin profiles between multiple ChIP samples. In Moghaddam et al. [25], they showed that H3K4me2 and H3K27me3 distribution patterns were similar overall in various Arabidopsis thaliana accessions and remained largely unchanged in their F1 progeny [25].