Another important measure to show the advancements and trends of Genomics & Informatics is classifying the documents into appropriate categories. By classifying articles in Genomics & Informatics, we aimed to assign one or more classes or categories to a document, making it easier to manage and sort. As an interdisciplinary scientific journal, Genomics & Informatics combines biology, computer science, information engineering, mathematics, medicine, and statistics to analyze and interpret biological data. Thus, the research articles of Genomics & Informatics may be classified into different groups based on specialty.
Document clustering involves the use and extraction of descriptors, which are sets of words that describe the content within the cluster. We chose K-means clustering, where the K-means process initializes with a pre-determined number of clusters [7,8]. The mean of the clustered observations is calculated and used as the new cluster centroid, in an iterative process until the algorithm reaches convergence.
We also used term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) [9] to give different weighting to words based on their importance to a document in the journal. The TF-IDF weighting for a word increases with the number of times the word appears in the document, but decreases based on how frequently the word appears in the entire document set.
Fig. 3A shows K-means clustering, with seven clusters for 243 articles published during the period from 2003 to 2010, and the data are displayed on a two-dimensional space. This reflects some degree of indexing and sorting of each cluster to identify the top n words that are nearest to the cluster centroid, which give a good sense of the main topic of the cluster. Publications in cluster 1 are presumed to belong to association studies (keywords: SNPs, polymorphism, and association). Publications in cluster 2 are presumed to belong to microarray and expression studies (keywords: cell, expression, RNA, and proteins). Likewise, cluster 3 is presumed to be related to pathway studies (keywords: pathways, metabolic, network, and visualization). Cluster 4 is assumed to be related to databases and computational methods (keywords: databases, sequence, web, and search). Cluster 5 seems to be related to studies of protein interaction (keywords: protein, domains, and interaction). The keywords for cluster 6 were clone, human, chromosomes, and region. The keywords for cluster 7 were microarrays, expression, clustering, and normal.
Fig. 3C shows K-means clustering, with seven clusters for 256 articles published during the period from 2011 to 2018, and the data are displayed on a two-dimensional space. The keywords of each cluster were slightly different from the version in Fig. 3A, which contained information for earlier articles. The keywords for cluster 1 were model, protein structures, interaction, and prediction. The keywords for cluster 2 were cancer, mutations, tumor, samples, and cell. The keywords for cluster 3 were elements, transcription, expression, and DNA. The keywords for cluster 4 were DNA, database, and species. The keywords for cluster 5 were SNPs, association, population, and genotype. The keywords for cluster 6 were groups, review, and medicine, and the keywords for cluster 7 were expression, cancer, and protein activation. It is noticeable that in later volumes, the keywords medicine and cancer appear more often. This coincides with the result shown in Fig. 2, where cancer-related genes appeared more often in later volumes of the journal.
There were some overlapping keywords between different clusters. For example, microarray appeared in both cluster 2 and 7 in Fig. 3A. Likewise, the keyword cancer appeared in both cluster 2 and cluster 7 in Fig. 3C. It is a common occurrence that search terms containing one or more same words belong to different topic groups because of the complexity of natural language. The process of identifying main topics through clustering requires some human judgment. This is one of the drawbacks of clustering, and it is beyond the scope of this paper.
Once we have tokenized data, a basic analysis that is commonly performed is counting tokens and their distribution in a document or set of documents. From the frequency distribution, we can generate a word cloud to obtain an intuitive visualization of the words used in the text. Finally, Fig. 3B and 3D shows some tag clouds for each cluster in Fig. 3A, and 3C, respectively [10,11]. A tag cloud is a visual representation of text data, typically used to depict keyword metadata, where the importance of each tag is shown with font size or color.