In July 1990, just a couple of months before the Human Genome Project (HGP) officially began, the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) held the conference, titled "Genetics, Ethics, and Human Values: Human Genome Mapping, Genetic Screening, and Therapy," in Tokyo and in Inuyama City, Japan. The Conference was co-sponsored by the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNESCO. Here, the Conference produced the Declaration consisting of eight statements. The following information is the main content of the Declaration [2].
The Conference agreed that the HGP would present no inherent ethical problems but was concerned about genetic testing, which would be available through the project, since the identification and sequencing of new genes can expand the scope for diagnostic tests. The Declaration emphasizes the importance of the welfare of the person tested and the confidentiality of the test results. For this, adequate genetic counseling is recommended. Also, the Declaration requires that the needs of developing countries should obtain their due share of the benefits that ensue from the HGP.
Regarding gene therapy, the Declaration states that it should be limited to conditions that cause significant disability and not employed simply to enhance or suppress cosmetic, behavioral, or cognitive traits that are not related to any recognized human disease. Regarding germ-line gene therapy, the Declaration states that 'continued discussion of both its technical and ethical aspects is essential and that, before germ-line therapy is undertaken, its safety must be well established, for changes in germ cells would affect the descendants of patients.'
The Declaration acknowledges public concern about the growth of genetic knowledge, which is partly caused by a misconception: the genetic knowledge reveals an essential aspect of humanness (i.e., genetic essentialism); it may reduce human beings to mere base pairs of DNA (i.e., genetic reductionism). To correct this misconception, the Declaration recommends education of the public and open discussion. To ensure the setting and observance of ethical standards, continuous multidisciplinary and transcultural dialog and ethical sensitivity in policy-making are recommended.