An operon, which is an independent unit of biochemical function in the bacterial genome, consists of functionally related genes under the control of a single promoter [1]. Thus, the cluster of genes in an operon is transcribed into a single mRNA molecule, referred to as a polycistronic system. This foundational concept of bacterial genome organization has been leading to the discovery of fundamental regulatory mechanisms of bacterial transcription. Bacterial transcription is a biological process that is initiated from a promoter by the RNA polymerase (RNAP) holoenzyme complex, consisting of a single RNAP core unit and a σ-factor subunit. Association with different σ-factor subunits provides promoter specificity to the RNAP core unit. Seven species of σ-factor subunits, for example, have been identified in Escherichia coli, and each participates in the transcription of a specific set of genes in response to growth conditions [2]. In addition to the σ-factor association, transcription is either activated or repressed by a wide range of transcription factors, such as the Lac repressor of the lac operon. It was estimated that E. coli encodes roughly 300 regulatory DNA-binding proteins, of which 35% are activators, 43% are repressors, and 22% are dual regulators [3].
Bacterial gene expression can be regulated by other regulatory factors, in addition to regulatory DNA-binding proteins, such as small regulatory RNAs and internal promoters within operons, which increase the transcriptome complexity [4, 5]. Over the last decade or so, many of these examples have been discovered by quantitative analysis of bacterial transcriptomes, which are defined as the complete set of cellular RNA transcripts. Although DNA microarrays have provided comprehensive information on the transcriptome's complexity in bacterial cells [6, 7], the advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS) has dramatically accelerated our analytical capacity via high-throughput transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) in combination with mRNA enrichment methods [8]. This large amount of data has revealed many unexpected features in the bacterial transcriptome, including gene structures, multiple promoters, and RNA-based regulation [7, 9, 10]. In some cases, small RNAs (sRNAs) account for 10% to 20% of bacterial RNA products, which have important regulatory roles [8]. These new findings suggest that bacterial transcription is much more complicated and subtle than previously thought. In this review, we discuss advances in bacterial transcriptomics, based on RNA-seq, and the current understanding of the complexity and regulation of bacterial transcriptomes.