It is a well-established fact that the main cause of type 1 diabetes is the autoimmune destruction of β-cells in the pancreas [1]. Reports demonstrate that kir6.2 is an ATP/ADP ratio-sensitive protein that plays a vital role in operating the K+ channel and simultaneously controls Ca+2 ion channel function, which in turn triggers the exocytosis of insulin. But, due to mutations [10] in certain amino acids (H46Y, R50Q, Q52R, G53D, V59M, L164P, C166T, K170T, R201H, and Y330S), the whole mechanism is perturbed, blocking the exocytosis of insulin, which might be a cause of type-1 diabetes. Again, due to the unavailability of the crystal structure of kir6.2, molecular targeting with drugs is difficult. But, a rational design of in silico structure prediction approaches comes in handy under such circumstances to study this further. From the structural inspection of both wild-type and mutant kir6.2 models, it is concluded that mutation has no major structural changes or deviation in the structure quality of the model. In recent years, due to the adverse effect of synthetic drugs, phytochemicals have drawn substantial attention as alternative medications. The literature reports curcumin, genistein, piperine, and pterostilbene to have strong inhibitory effects against type 1 diabetes. Hence, all four of these phytochemicals were docked with predicted models of kir6.2 in the ATP-binding pocket [12] to check the inhibitory effect after mutation. The results of docking suggested that all phytochemicals bind at high affinity with both models, and the common interacting residues Ala-178, Leu-181, Phe-183, and Ala-300 were found in the same pocket, even after mutation. Amino acid residues, like Phe-183 and Arg-301, have also been observed as participating in hydrogen bonding within the binding pocket of mutant kir6.2 in the case of docking with all four inhibitors, supporting the fact that mutation might not affect the binding affinity of kir6.2 protein with phytochemicals. The current investigation concluded that phytochemicals, like curcumin, genistein, piperine, and pterostilbene, have strong inhibitory effects on kir6.2 protein. In addition, the study reports that these four phytochemicals namely, curcumin, genistein, piperine, and pterostilbene are effective in both normal and mutant conditions of kir6.2, suggesting future implications for type 1 diabetes mellitus treatment.