The draft sequence was published in 2001 [3]. It was a collaborative work of the public sector via the international Human Genome Project (HGP) and the private sector via Celera Genomics. HGP refers to the international 13-year effort, formally begun in October 1990, to discover all the human genes and make them accessible for further biological study. Another project goal was to determine the complete sequence of the human genome. Actually, the latter group led by Dr. Craig Venter, was the critical player for the success of finishing the sequence, which invented the strategy of the shotgun sequence, followed by computational assembly [4]. It was a revolution in genomic research.
With the help of the draft sequence, Japanese Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms (JSNP), the first population-specific SNP database (http://snp.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/), was established as a collaborative work of HGC-IMS and JST [5]. A total of 190,562 genetic variations (mainly SNP) in 24 subjects were discovered and confirmed and have been made available through this website [6].
Based on information in the JSNP database, Tanaka's group in SRC succeeded in identifying a susceptibility gene for myocardial infarction [7]. This study was the first GWAS in the world [8, 9]. By a two-stage association study-i.e., a GWAS followed by replication of a limited number of the SNPs with significant p-values-they found a functional SNP in the lymphotoxin-α (LTA) gene associated with myocardial infarction. Their GWAS was quite primitive by current standards. They used only ~100,000 SNPs from the JSNP database, because in those days, the number of genes was considered to be ~100,000, and basically, one gene is expected to be covered by one SNP. Both of these assumptions have been subsequently disproven by the HGP [10] and the HapMap Project [11]. The coverage of the genome in the GWAS was low, because the success rate for this genotyping was only 71%. The estimated power (β value) for detection of a locus was also low, because the number of subjects was very small. However, the basic idea for the current GWAS, including linkage disequilibrium mapping for identifying the most associated SNPs and a pooled control strategy, were already present in the frontier study. Their study clearly showed that the GWAS was a reality, not the dream of statistical geneticists, and that a denser map of common SNPs was indispensable for realizing the dream.