The dispersion of Crocodylus from the Indo-Pacific into Africa occurred 8~12 MYA, followed by trans-Atlantic dispersion to the New World 4~8 MYA. The crocodilian fossil record also showed that Crocodylus species were present in Southern Europe and Northern Africa during the late Miocene with warmer and wetter climate across this region [747576]. This might have allowed the Crocodylus species to move from Asia into Africa without requiring long-distance marine dispersion. It is likely that the species group comprising C. mindorensis, C. novaeguineae, and C. johnstoni, positioned to the basal node of the phylogenetic tree as suggested by Oaks [16] might be the origin of the Indo-Pacific species. This agreed with karyological data of Crocodylus, which showed a diploid chromosome of C. mindorensis, C. novaeguineae, C. johnstoni (Indo-Pacific species) C. niloticus (African species), Crocodylus moreletii, Crocodylus acutus, and Crocodylus intermedius (New World species) to be 32. Crocodylus maintained the broad African and Indo-Pacific distribution, and then split between the African + New World species clade and the remaining Indo-Pacific species around 4~8 MYA.
The latter hypothesis is more likely, based on the most parsimonious explanation with karyological data. This also agreed with the phylogenetic relationship of some Nile crocodiles (C. niloticus), complete mt genome sequences placed with those of New World species, and the exclusion of Nile crocodiles from other populations [15]. The two earliest fossils of C. niloticus and New World species appear during the Pliocene [73], and C. niloticus has lingual salt-excreting glands. Moreover, some populations of C. niloticus occupy estuarine habitats [63]. This suggested that an African crocodilian crossed the Atlantic recently, when this oceanic barrier was hundreds of miles wide [1577]. The presence of trans-Atlantic dispersion is also found in other vertebrates [78].
The molecular placement of C. porosus, C. palustris, and C. siamensis is expected to position as the sister to African + New World species (Fig. 1). The ancestral karyotype feature is still retained in African and New World crocodiles. Comparison of the data of chromosome painting in C. niloticus and chromosome maps with functional genes in C. siamensis, revealed that five large chromosomes of C. siamensis correspond to six large chromosomes of C. niloticus [2326]. C. siamensis chromosome 3 (CSI3) is metacentric, and C. niloticus chromosome 5 (CNI5) and CNI6 are acrocentrics. CSI3p corresponds to CNI6, and CSI3q to CNI5. This suggests that bi-armed chromosomes CSI3 are the results of centric fusion among the ancestral types of acrocentric chromosomes (Fig. 3). A centric fusion event is more likely because CNI5 and CNI6 are considered the prototypes in the lineages of Crocodylus, based on the evidence of karyotype and chromosome constitution with other crocodilians [1920]. The karyotype of C. palustris and C. siamensis (2n = 30) probably resulted from one centric fusion of two acrocentric chromosomes from ancestral Crocodylus species from the Indo-Pacific species, leading to the reduction of uni-armed chromosomes in both two species. By contrast, karyotype of C. porosus (2n = 34) might result from one centric fission of large bi-armed chromosomes from ancestral Crocodylus species, leading to the increase of acrocentric chromosomes.
Simultaneously, the molecular placement of New World species is also controversial, considering complete mt genome sequences and the mixture of several molecular loci, in which C. rhombifer and C. moreletii are positioned at a basal or recent clade (Fig. 1). The karyotype data of C. niloticus and New World species (C. acutus and C. intermedius) suggest that the karyotype of C. moreletii and C. rhombifer is probably located at the recent clade of New World species. The karyotype of C. moreletii contains a lower number of bi-armed chromosomes and a higher number of uni-armed chromosomes, compared to C. acutus and C. intermedius, making the fundamental numbers of these three species different. This suggests that the presence of pericentric inversion or centromere positioning has probably occurred in the ancestral karyotype of C. moreletii after divergence from C. acutus and C. intermedius around 3~7 MYA during the Pliocene. By contrast, the karyotype of C. rhombifer contains 2n = 30, and centric fusion might have occurred in the ancestral karyotype, leading to the reduction of acrocentric chromosomes in C. rhombifer.