FBI DNA is formed by the folding back at one point of a non-helical parallel track of double-stranded DNA at as sharp as 180° and the intertwining of the bent helixes within each other's major groove to form an intercoil with a diameter of 2.2 nm (Fig. 1A). FBI DNA could be considered a double-stranded version of a hairpin or stem-and-loop structure of RNA and single-stranded DNA. But, such sharp bending and formation of a four-stranded intercoil are not considered possible with a double helical B-DNA with a diameter of 2.0 nm [8]. In an extended definition, FBI DNA may contain a loop and a much longer stem under biological conditions. Intercoil DNA is designated to distinguish itself from supercoil DNA, which is thicker than 2.2 nm. Intercoil DNA is also termed to avoid the use of four-stranded DNA, which has the connotation of four-stranded base pairing among homologous repeats. It needs to be emphasized that intercoil DNA is formed by two intertwining duplexes of any sequence, but when homology is met at a certain region, homologous recombination may proceed via heteroduplex formation with the help of the proper enzymes involved.
FBI DNA was first formulated based upon a rare but unique electron microscopy (EM) configuration of plant mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules and space-filling models [7, 8]. Once the FBI DNA structure was realized with the space filling model, it was possible to perform homologous recombination with direct contact of the repeat sequences. The intra-molecular homologous recombination of a deletion and inversion occurs via 1) synapsis of the repeats in the intercoil, 2) heteroduplex formation by 90° base flipping, and 3) nick-and-close resolution of the sugar phosphate backbone crossing over [7]. Inter-molecular homologous recombination, known as site-specific insertion, on the other hand, is mediated by direct contact between the attP site at the tip of the FBI DNA and the attB site on the target DNA [8]. Perpendicular approach of the foldback tip onto the target site effectively resolves the year-long topological puzzle encountered in four-stranded base pair winding of two circular DNA molecules and explains that 6- or 7-bp attP and attB sites correspond to the diameter of the approaching FBI DNA tip and the target width. DNA transposition is explainable by the perpendicular approach of the detached transposon ends in intercoil form to the host target, as described in detail below.