In this study, we built an analysis pipeline for targeted sequencing data generated based on the hybrid-capture method. As UMI-adopted targeted sequencing data are notorious for their novelty and complexity, we mainly focused on finding tools and optimizing methods for the analysis.
Our data show an on-target rate of 37%, and there is little variation among samples. This may suggest that almost equal amounts of libraries of each sample were used for hybridization. However, because 37% is relevantly low for hybridization efficiency, the estimation of the on-target rates shows that still there is room for improvement.
The reason why on-target rate is important is that by estimating on-target rates and further upgrades of protocols, the quality of targeted hybrid-capture sequencing could be improved. In detail, protocol modifications during hybridization steps could possibly bring about an increase of on-target rates. For example, a slightly excessive amount of input DNA or target probes can increase the off-target effects during hybridization. Furthermore, inconsistent temperature or slightly higher/lower temperature than the proper temperature could bring about larger off-target effects than expected.
With respect to the pipeline, when using CallMolecular ConsensusReads, insertion and deletion errors are not considered in the consensus model. Therefore, realignment steps using other methods, such as IndelRealigner (GATK, v4.0.2.1), should be integrated for better and more precise analysis for identification of short indels. Furthermore, even though we optimized the tools and customized python codes for analyzing UMI data, there are still many tools that could be used in one analysis pipeline. We are still trying to minimize irrelevant steps to simplify the process.
In summary, we have built an analysis pipeline specialized for UMI-adopted hybrid-capture-based data. Given the fact that the precision medicine era has been coming lately and that targeted sequencing and UMI technology help to comprehensively understand the genomewide status of cancer patients, this report suggests that the quality of the experiment can be examined precisely and efficiently by this pipeline, and our laboratory sees its positive potential in being widely used for studies in various clinical fields.