Schematic overview of the tag array in fission yeast. (A) Structure of deletion cassettes and detailed tag regions. The deletion cassette containing the KanMX4 gene is flanked by a pair of unique bar-codes (UPTAG and DNTAG, corresponding to up-tags and down-tags, respectively) and regions of homology to the gene of interest (RHG). The deletion cassette replaces the open reading frame of interest by homologous recombination at the RHG regions. To facilitate whole genome analysis, each deletion cassette is assigned a molecular bar-code, a pair of unique 20-mer sequences, which are referred to as the “UP tag” and “DN tag” as shown in the insets with dotted lines. To amplify each tag for hybridization, PCR was performed using the following universal primer pairs: U1/U2 for the “UP tag” and D1//D2 for the “DN tag.” For labeling, biotin was attached to the U2 and D1 primers (shown as asterisks). (B) Scheme of bar-code design. The 20-mer bar-codes used in the study were selected using following criteria: (1) Tm of 60–65℃ with a deviation of ±2℃, (2) GC content between 30% and 70%, (3) less than 10-bp cross-hybridization with other bar-codes, and (4) less than 10-bp cross-hybridization with genomic DNA of fission yeast. The algorithm loop was repeated until to get 11,000 bar-codes. (C) Tm distribution of the bar-codes. The bar-codes obtained from the above algorithm showed a normal distribution in the range of 57–67℃ with a mean of 62℃. (D) Overall scheme of hybridization between tag amplicons and array probes. The pair of unique bar-codes consisting of an up-tag and a down-tag were amplified by PCR using a pair of flanking universal primers, one of which was labeled by biotin (shown with asterisks). The PCR product was hybridized with the custom-made array. Note that anti-sense strands (filled rectangles with white dots) of tags were hybridized to sense strands (dotted rectangles) of probes on the array. To reduce unwanted hybridization, all regions of the universal primers were shielded by blocking oligonucleotides (shown as gray rectangles).