Identifying positive selection assists in the exploration of the genetic mechanisms of phenotypic diversity [2]. Selective sweep causes changes in the allele frequencies of SNPs, and the resulting changes in genetic variation can be useful in detecting selective pressure [9]. Although several studies have reported selective sweeps identified using chips such as the Illumina Porcine 60K SNP BeadChip [22] in pigs, few have identified selective sweeps using whole-genome sequencing. Therefore, detecting positive selection in the pig genome appears worthwhile.
Here we implemented two representative between-population methods, XPEHH and XPCLR, to explore positive selection. XPEHH is designed to detect near fixation or fixed selective sweeps by comparing haplotypes between two populations [10]. XPCLR is more robust for SNP discovery bias than allele frequency-based methods [9]. XPEHH tests whether the SNP site is homozygous in one population and polymorphic in another by comparing the extended haplotype homozygosity score of two populations on a core SNP. A negative XPEHH value indicates that selection happened in the reference population [15]. XPCLR was designed as a multi-locus composite likelihood ratio method to avoid the bias influence in SNP discovery. XPEHH and XPCLR find one core SNP and grid window using multi-locus information, and thus these tests identify more significant selection regions than Fst or Tajima's D [23]. Identifying significant genome-wide selection regions with multiple loci using a single-marker Fst test is difficult. Therefore, for multiple SNP methods, we carried out XPEHH and XPCLR and excluded Fst and Tajima's D. XPEHH assumes an approximately normal distribution. Park et al. [16] determined empirical p-values using the top 1% of the significance, and our results show that these significance cutoffs are more reasonable. In addition, positive selection identified by multiple test methods is more convincing.
Bioinformatic analysis of genes under positive selection in this study revealed interesting biological information related to lactation, reproduction, meat quality, and growth. We identified several GO terms using the DAVID functional annotation tool. Immune system process (GO:0002376) was found to be significant in Duroc. Williams et al. [3] reported that a low level of chronic immune system resulted in greater growth in pigs. This GO term suggests that genes with some growth traits may have been under selection in the domestication process. Growth traits are referred to as important indicators of the immune system. This suggests that SLA-DQA1 might play a role in the pig immune system. In addition, BMP6 and PRKG1 in Duroc had biological pathways related to meat-quality traits. Fonseca et al. [8] reported that the BMP6 gene plays a role in increasing the quality of meat juiciness and tenderness. Lee et al. [22] identified the significant SNPs located in the BMP6 gene related to meat quality through a genome-wide association study using the Porcine 60K BeadChip. Therefore, the SLA-DQA1 and BMP6 genes might be effects of positive selection for growth and meat quality, respectively, in Duroc. In Yorkshire, three genes under significant positive selection were ST6GALNAC2, EPHX1, and SEMA5A; these genes were related to lactation traits in several previous studies. The ST6GALNAC2 gene is expressed during lactation [5], EPHX1 is expressed in the early involution of mammary glands [6], and SEMA5A is reportedly related to milk production traits in cattle [21]. In Landrace, the ER gene was reported to be related to reproduction traits in previous studies. Generally ER refers to either ER α or ER β and estrogens are involved in differentiation and maintenance of reproductive tissue. Krege et al. [7] reported that mice lacking ER α exhibited severe reproductive problems. This implies that the ER gene could be an effect of positive selection for lactation traits in pigs as well as in mice. Our findings show that several significant SNPs were present in genes found to be related to lactation, reproduction, meat quality, and growth traits in previous studies. These results indirectly support the effects of positive selection. Unfortunately, information on many of the genes with significant signals has not yet been analyzed. Based on SNP analyses for positively selected genes, SLA-DQA1 and EPHX1 genes exhibited evidence of positive selection in D-Y, respectively. However, an enrichment test revealed that the three significant amino-acid positions in SLA-DQA1 and EPHX1 were not significant.
Our analyses suggested that several genes–such as EPHX1, PARK2, BMP6, SLA-DQA1, PRKG1, and ST6GALNAC2–might have undergone positive selection. These genes are associated with lactation, reproduction, meat quality, and growth traits. All findings in this study provide useful data for the study of pigs, however our results are preliminary and need to validate these genes in another set of samples.