Our targeted resequencing method for somatic mutation profiling in lung cancer from 30 cancer-related genes produced unbiased target DNAs repeatedly. Analysis of the enriched DNAs by next-generation sequencing identified previously known mutations in the samples. Further analysis of more samples by targeted resequencing will reveal many novel variant candidates.
Target enrichment was performed using Selector technology (Halo Genomics, Uppsala, Sweden), which showed improved coverage and compatibility with next-generation sequencing library construction by employing rolling-circle amplification [10]. This method exhibited about 97% mean coverage at 30× depth, average 42% specificity, and high reproducibility (r2 = 0.98) of target enrichment in the normal sample (Tables 1, 2, 3), indicating that this is applicable to targeted resequencing of clinical samples. Although the enrichment specificity was moderate, this was overcome by increasing sequencing depth. As the total DNA bases of the target regions was 107 kb, 97% coverage at 30× depth was achieved by 3.25 Gb of sequencing, which does not create any cost issues by using next-generation sequencing technologies.
Exome resequencing has proven to be robust and effective for somatic variant detection in coding regions [31, 32]. Comparisons of sequencing data from normal and cancer tissues from individual patients have unveiled individual somatic mutation profiles. However, the cancer cell lines that we used had no normal cell pairs. To solve this problem, we tried to remove previously known normal variations as much as possible. Predicted SNVs from the sequencing data were further filtered using common variation information from the most updated dbSNP database. As a result, we found many somatic mutations, which included previously reported mutations in the COSMIC database, such as variations in TP53, KRAS, and STK11 of sample H-23 and in EGFR of sample H-1650 (Table 4). Especially, the number of reads that covered the four variations was more than 1,000. This provides many advantages when compared to whole-genome sequencing or whole-exome sequencing. Sequencing of cancer samples has raised several issues, such as sample purity and cancer heterogeneity. These shortcomings can only be overcome by in-depth sequencing of target regions. Therefore, our protocol is also useful for cost-effective somatic mutation screening of admixed clinical cancer samples.
Compared to whole-genome sequencing, targeted sequencing has an issue with uneven coverage of targeted genes. In Table 3, cancer samples showed fewer sequencing reads at target regions. This low target capture efficiency in cancer samples could be explained by genetic variations in cancer genomes that inhibit the hybridization between cancer DNA fragments and the designed capture oligonucleotides. This may be overcome by trial-and-error screening in selecting more efficient oligonucleotides.
There are two kinds of target capture technologies: hybridization and PCR. Hybridization-based target capture has been widely used and is able to cover more target regions but is time-consuming and hard to handle with many samples. In contrast, the PCR-based method is faster and allows us to handle more samples. Our protocol is a multiple displacement amplification-based method that is as efficient as the PCR-based method. For example, hybridization-based target capture methods, such as the Agilent SureSelect target enrichment kit and NimbleGen SeqCap EZ kit, normally handle 1-8 samples at the same time, while our protocol with a liquid handler could process 96 samples in parallel. This costs 12 times less money. Therefore, our target enrichment is scalable and easy to handle with multiple samples. This can result in remarkable reduction of total cost when combined with multiplexed next-generation sequencing. Therefore, our target resequencing protocol provides a scalable sample-handling tool for a genetic variation study of lung adenocarcinoma.