Biotea profiles proposed to Bioschemas (as a draft) include journal, volume, issue, scholarly article and semantic scholarly annotation (http://bioschemas.org/groups/Biotea2Bioschemas). These profiles corresponding to journal, volume, issue and scholarly article are reasonably stable as they correspond to regular metadata and data that have been well-established for publications, e.g., title, authors, abstract, journal, publisher, pages, dates and citations. Biotea supports two ways to represent annotations, one based on the Annotation Ontology [6] and another one on the Open Annotation Ontology [7]. None of them can be fully mapped to schema.org, therefore modifications are more likely to be introduced to our SemanticAnnotation profiles, so it can adapt well to a variety of annotators and annotated documents. Currently we are using such profiles for annotations recognized in scholarly documents, but it could as well be deployed, for instance, to annotate chemicals in patent documents. As more use cases will be explored, further adjustments will be needed and should be addressed before moving from a draft to a supported profile.
The publication is represented as a schema:ScholarlyArticle part of a periodical publication, i.e., a journal with possibly a volume and issue. The property schema:about is used to link the publication to its annotations which link back to the article via schema:subjectOf. An overview of our Biotea mapping to Bioschemas is shown in Fig. 1.
One of the key aspects in Biotea’s mapping to schema.org is the separation between the structured data and the publication itself. Schema.org includes some properties in schema:CreativeWork, that should be used only for a structured data representation. However, those properties are still limited, i.e., do not cover all the needs regarding structured metadata on top of scholarly publications. For instance, structure metadata can be split into different parts, e.g., linksets, but there is only one schema:hasPart property for schema:CreativeWork. In order to allow for more input, we therefore keep the structured data model separated from the publication, the former modelled as a schema:CreativeWork and the latter as a schema:ScholarlyPublication; the structured data is linked to the publication via schema:mainEntity. Through this separation in combination with the use of a lightweight semantic approach such as schemas.org, we aim to improve our approaches for FAIRability for publications, since this type of data gives better compliance (in comparison to JATS/XML) with the Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability (FAIR) principles [8].