The discovery of genetic variations in diseases or phenotypes of interest (e.g., weight, hair loss, intelligence, etc.) is quickly paying off. Clinical applications have focused on predictive models of disease. Previously, disease predictions were made using a few genetic variants that showed significance in genome-wide association studies (GWASs), on which basis a polygenic score (PGS) was calculated. Most predictions resulted in poor discrimination and imprecision. Predictive models are gradually starting to use more genetic variants, as GWASs are discovering more genetic variations as a consequence of using an increased number of samples, and recently developed predictive models take into account genome-wide variations, calculating a genome-wide polygenic score (GPS). In a study using a GPS for body mass index, the people with the highest score category had an obesity prevalence rate four times higher than that of the other categories [6]. Thus, the GPS method has yielded better predictions than ever before.
The most worrisome factor of all relates to the reporting of genetic test results. The results of DTC genotyping should be clearly communicated to the consumer; in particular, clear guidance should be given regarding what these tests indicate about their illness or health and what they cannot show, with special emphasis on the fact that these tests cannot be a diagnosis of disease. Consumers may make decisions on their own based on inaccurate or non-deterministic DTC results, and may even take actions that can damage their health without appropriate consultation with clinicians. DTC companies should therefore inform consumers of the limitations of the test results and encourage consumers to consult with clinicians before taking action.
Many of the concerns mentioned above as shortcomings of DTC genetic testing remain pending. At this point, the guidelines provided by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics for DTC genotyping are as follows [7]. First, genetic testing and the interpretation of results are complex processes. Thus, genetic testing should be performed in a laboratory that has been inspected by an appropriate agency, such as the CLIA program in the United States. In addition, genetic experts, such as clinical geneticists or genetic counselors, should handle requests from consumers and the provision of test results. They will protect consumers from improper informed consent procedures, a lack of pre-test descriptions, incorrect genetic test items, and inappropriate precautions or medical practices resulting from the misinterpretation of test results. Second, consumers should be informed by the DTC company of what the test results can and cannot do before DTC genotyping. Third, the DTC company should explain that unexpected, or unrequested, results may come from genotyping. Consumers should also be informed that these unforeseen consequences can affect not only themselves, but also their family members. Fourth, the DTC company should inform the consumer about the scientific basis upon which the genetic test was conducted. If this is too technical for the general public to understand, it should be explained in a way that facilitates easy understanding. Fifth, consumers should receive the following information as part of an explanation about personal information protection: who will see the results of a consumer’s genetic test, what measures will be taken to protect the genetic information, how the sample will be processed after it is used, how the genetic test results will subsequently affect life insurance or disability insurance, who owns the genetic information produced, and whether the genetic information can be provided to third parties.