Biological sequences, such as DNA sequences, have a great number of contiguous patterns consisting of frequent items. Which patterns are interesting to biologists? Is a pattern that occurs more frequently more interesting? So far, in most approaches, the number of occurrences has been a major measure of determining an interesting pattern. This measure, however, is not enough to discriminate a pattern from the background noise and may induce much time to spend for checking patterns of no biological meaning. Researchers are more interested in contiguous patterns that are statistically significant than those simply occurring frequently. The aim of mining interesting patterns is to analyze the important biological functions hidden in the extremely large amounts of genomic sequences. In this work, we aimed to discover surprising contiguous patterns that occur at a frequency higher than their expected frequencies. To find such surprising patterns with confidence, we chose to use a more suitable measure, information [1], which is widely studied and used in the field of communication. In information theory, if a pattern is expected to occur frequently based on some prior knowledge or by chance, then an occurrence of that pattern carries less information. Thus, we can use information to test the surprise of an occurrence of a pattern. The information gain is introduced to denote the accumulated information of a pattern in a DNA sequence and is used to exhibit the degree of surprise of the pattern.
Many works for sequential pattern mining take an a priori approach, such as Agrawal and Srikant [2], who used downward closure property to prune infrequent patterns, which says that if a pattern is infrequent, all of its superpatterns must be infrequent. It suffers from the level-wise difficulty for candidate generation-and-test and needs several database scans for sequential pattern mining. A typical Apriori-like approach such as Generalized Sequential Patterns (GSP) [3] is a good example of this category. An efficient algorithm, PrefixSpan [4], has been proposed, representing projection-based sequential pattern mining. This approach examines only the prefix subsequences and projects only their corresponding postfix subsequences into the databases. Sequential patterns are grown by exploring length-1 frequent patterns in each projected database. Using the projected database, however, every expansion of sequential patterns needs a recursive process, which is not effective for DNA sequence mining. The problem of finding the frequent maximal contiguous pattern from sequences more than two has been introduced in [5-8]. In addition, Yang et al. [9] have proposed an interesting technique to find periodic patterns in a sequence of events. Lu et al. [10] have proposed a pattern discovery algorithm that can identify over-represented patterns inside DNA sequences by introducing a new measurement system.
Another efficient algorithm, MacosVSpan [11], has been proposed, which gets the maximal subsequence of each data item by fixed-length spanning and finally looks for frequent maximal contiguous patterns using a suffix tree. Although this approach reduces recursive execution for expanding sequence patterns, it also suffers from the problem of producing and using projected databases. For long data sequences, the projected database grows much faster in comparison with the original database. Kang et al. [12] have proposed an approach to improve MacosVSpan using a fixed-length spanning tree, where each node maintains the frequency of subsequence overlapping. In this approach, all the candidates are produced first, including frequent and nonfrequent patterns; then, each candidate is scanned through the database to see whether it is frequent or not. This is obviously very time and memory-consuming.
Recently, Zerin et al. [13] proposed a position-based fast method to find contiguous frequent patterns, which needs to scan the database only once to construct the fixed length spanning tree. This approach builds the fixed length spanning tree in the same fashion as Kang et al. [12] but records the sequence identification (ID) and starting position of the fixed length pattern with the frequency in the leaf node of the tree, showing better results than the previous methods. Rashid et al. [14] have also proposed an efficient approach to mining significant contiguous frequent patterns from DNA sequences by constructing the fixed length spanning tree and by using a threshold that reduces the number of candidates. In this paper, we further develop this approach by proposing an index-based method, where the sequence ID and the staring position of each sequence are recorded in the leaf node of the tree as a variable length array. If a fixed-length pattern occurs multiple times in a sequence, we put the sequence ID as an index and put the start positions of the fixed length patterns in the variable length array. As a result, this approach significantly reduces memory space more than Zerin et al. [13].