MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding single stranded RNAs (~18-22 bp) found in most eukaryotes, playing a crucial role in a wide range of biological processes, such as host-viral interaction, apoptosis, stem cell maintenance, and metabolism, etc. miRNAs are involved in gene silencing mechanisms by targeting un-translated regions of mRNA through sequence complementarity [12], and approximately 30% of protein-coding genes are regulated by miRNAs [3]. As many genes can be regulated by a single or multiple miRNAs, an immense interest has been created to understand miRNA-based gene regulation through the identification of miRNAs, as well as their target genes. The Argonaute (AGO) class of proteins plays a crucial functional role in the molecular recognition of miRNA-mRNA hybrids during the process of gene regulation [45], and mutations in either the sequence of miRNAs or the miRNA target sites have a significant contribution in the manifestation of cancer due to the loss of gene regulation [56].
Leukemia is a cancer of white blood cells that is commonly classified as acute myeloid leukemia (AML), acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and chronic lymphoblastic leukemia. AML is a well-characterized blood cancer in which the unnatural growth of immature white blood cells takes place, where several genes involved are either up-regulated or down regulated by miRNAs. Though the importance of miRNAs in gene regulation [234578] and their regulation by RNA-induced silencing complexes [7] are well established, the mechanism of miRNA-induced gene silencing at the molecular level is still unclear [910]. Despite several detailed research studies, controlling abnormal cell proliferation at the molecular level through miRNA-mediated gene silencing is still a major challenge. Therefore, with the current knowledge, attempts have been made to study the AGO protein-assisted molecular interaction between miRNAs and their target genes, and a computational approach [11] in this regard will be of great aid and value. Here, in this study, the HOXA9 gene was selected from the literature as an important target in AML, and in silico approaches, like miRNA target site prediction, miRNA-mRNA duplex prediction, and molecular docking between AGO protein and four miRNAs, such as mir-145, mir-126, let7a, and mir-196b [81213], were conducted to elucidate the AGO protein-assisted molecular interaction between miRNAs and the HOXA9 gene in association with AML [1415] computationally.