Modern humans are indeed a very young species compared to their cousins, evolving just about 200,000 years ago (ya), which is a fraction of the 6 million years since the divergence of the human and chimpanzee lineages [1]. Fossils suggest that modern humans first emerged in East Africa and spread fairly quickly all over the world in the next 185,000 years or so (reviewed in Lu et al. [2]). After the divergence of humans and chimps, the major landmark in human history is the emergence of bipedals about 4 million years ago (mya), which enabled them to use their two feet as hands. Many species evolved afterwards until the evolution of Homo erectus, who, for the first time, migrated out of Southern Africa and initiated the spread of humans all around the globe. The migrated population of Homo erectus in East Africa eventually gave rise to modern humans about 200,000 ya and to Homo neanderthalensis, or Neanderthals, about 400,000 ya [3, 4]. Neanderthals survived until 28,000 ya, while modern humans are still surviving [5]. During the latter part of their existence, Neanderthals lived in Europe, as well as in Western Asia and the Middle East [6, 7]. Various lines of evidence suggest that modern humans started to migrate from East Africa to Europe and other parts of the world 100,000 ya, and the fossil evidence of humans and Neanderthals indicated that these species might have come into contact as early as 80,000 ya and co-habited for up to 10,000 years at certain geographic locations [6].
In the field of evolutionary biology, one of the most sought after questions has been what made modern humans superior than other related species-i.e., the genomic features that are unique to humans. The whole-genome sequencing of chimps, rhesus macaque, and other primates has given considerable boosts in this field, as the sequences of these primates opened up the possibility to conduct comprehensive comparative studies to the single-nucleotide level [8, 9]. Many attempts have been taken to identify the genetic reasons why modern humans developed such complex biological features than other primates, including the larger brain-to-body ratio, bipedalism, morphological changes, and significant development of communication skills and cognitive behavior. Recent studies have used various statistical methods to compare the sequence of these primates with humans in an attempt to find human-specific genes and gene regulatory sequences, eventually showing unexpectedly rapid evolution in the human lineage after the divergence from the ancestral primates [10-15]. The results from these analyses exhibit a good overview of the human-specific genomic elements, but these results are unable to distinguish which of these human-specific elements are specific to modern humans only. Since there has been no complete genome sequence of any archaic humans until recently, such sequence comparisons have been made only between the modern human genome and other primates, bypassing archaic humans, resulting in an overwhelming number of differences and the inability to identify which sequences changes are unique to modern humans and which are shared by all Homo species. Therefore, the comparative analysis between modern humans and archaic humans is expected to be more interesting and valuable by being more effective in identifying the critical genes and/or regulatory elements that may be fully or partially responsible for the evolution of the modern humans over other humans.
In order to identify such sequence changes, the modern human genome sequence must be compared with that of archaic humans. Neanderthals have always been a desired target for this purpose for multiple reasons. They are the closest cousins of modern humans, both anatomically and based on intelligence. Their slightly larger brain and wider body structure are the primary anatomical differences from the modern humans [16]. Fossil evidence suggests that Neanderthals used stone tools, they were hunter gatherers, and they had a social life, indicating that they had similar intelligence as modern humans until about 50,000 ya, when a "Creative explosion" occurred in modern humans [17, 18]. Another critical reason to target Neanderthals is that they are the latest archaic humans to go extinct, and their remains have been found in sufficiently good condition for analyzing down to the molecular level [19-21]. To make a comprehensive genomic comparison between modern and archaic humans, the whole genome of archaic humans has to be sequenced. The availability and widespread use of massively parallel high-throughput sequencing have now made it possible to sequence archaic genomes, which seemed impossible even a decade ago. The idea of sequencing an ancient genome was first implemented on cave bear [22] and, after its success, the mammoth genome [23]. The initial sequencing attempts on Neanderthals included sequencing of the mitochondrial genome, which was successful to a certain extent [24-26]. These successes eventually led paleogeneticists to attempt sequencing Neanderthal nuclear genomes. Almost all of the attempts have been made by amplifying the genome fragments via PCR and parallel sequencing, while some involve the use of a metagenomic approach. The early success of such attempts eventually led to the establishment of the Neanderthal Genome Project in 2005, which first announced the complete genome sequence of Neanderthals in 2010 [27] and recently released a cleaner and higher-coverage version (http://www.eva.mpg.de/neandertal/). Comprehensive comparisons have been made by the group on certain genetic entities with some very interesting inferences, based on the initial low-coverage sequencing data, but improvements in many aspects can be made by utilizing the recent, better version of the sequence and considering more types of genetic variances in the study. Here, we will discuss the inferences made from the comparison and what can be done next to answer some interesting questions regarding the evolution of modern humans.