RNA analysis has emerged as a reliable method of body fluid identification for forensic use [1-7]. Conventionally, immunological, enzymatic, and chemical detection of specific protein markers is used [8-10]. For example, prostate-specific antigen has been used for semen and hemoglobin for blood identification [9, 10]. These assays provide important information for crime scenes, but they can provide wrong information because of cross-reactions. Recently, several body fluid-specific mRNA markers have been discovered [1-7]: β-spectrin (SPTB), porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), and hemoglobin alpha locus 1 (HBA1) for blood; matrix metalloproteinase 7 and 11 (MMP7 and MMP11) for menstrual blood; statherin (STATH) and histatin 3 (HTN3) for saliva; kallikrein 3 (KLK3) and protamine 1 and 2 (PRM1 and PRM2) for semen; and human beta-defensin 1 (HBD-1) and mucin 4 (MUC4) for vaginal secretion [11]. After DNA/RNA co-extraction methods were applied to the forensic field, RNA analysis has become routine forensic analysis [12, 13].
RNA expression level is generally measured using reverse-transcription and standard end-point PCR (RT-PCR) or quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) in a forensic lab. Recently, using microarray platforms, body fluid-specific mRNA markers were identified at a genome-wide level [14-16], and multiplex qRT-PCR probes of these markers were developed for one-step identification of body fluid type [7, 16]. Currently, most of the multiplex qRT-PCR assays use a single marker for each body fluid. However, using a single marker for each body fluid may lead to false positive/negative identification, as some markers are expressed in more than two types of body fluid [4-6]. Recently, Roeder and Haas [17] suggested a novel approach of using a minimum of five mRNA markers for each body fluid and a scoring method based on multiple markers. In this regard, the multiplex qRT-PCR system is not useful, because the number of fluorescent dyes in one reaction is limited.
The NanoString nCounter (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA) is a recent platform that can quantify the expression of hundreds of mRNAs in a single reaction using color-coded molecular barcodes [18, 19]. NanoString nCounter is also known as a sufficiently robust method to measure expression in degraded RNA samples, such as formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and crude tissue lysates [18, 20]. Therefore, applying NanoString nCounter to forensic identification of body fluids enables the digital quantification of multiplexed markers for each body fluid.
In this study, we adopted the NanoString nCounter and designed a panel of NanoString probes for multiple markers for each body fluid. We tested the multiple markers in a large number of body fluid samples. As a result, we found that the new multiplexed method could improve the specificity and sensitivity of identification. We suggest that using multiple mRNA markers for each body fluid could improve the accuracy of body fluid identification.