Infectious diseases are major dreadful threat to human life, spread through many causative agents like bacteria, fungus, virus, etc. Therefore, development of potential drug is highly essential to fight against infectious diseases. Generally, methods of traditional drug design are tedious, time consuming, and cost intensive. Hence, several multidisciplinary approaches have gained research attention to reduce the time and cost during drug development process. In silico drug design is one of such approach, provides remarkable opportunity for identification of novel lead compounds as comparison to other conventional methods. Drug target identification is an important step involved in computer aided drug design process. In this context, the present study is planned to identify a potential drug target against infectious diseases caused by Bordetella petrii using various computational tools and techniques. B. petrii is a gram-negative coccobacilli of the phylum Proteobacteria, has been found exclusively in close association with humans and various warm-blooded animals due to its independent existence as an environmental facultative anaerobe [1]. B. petrii exhibits the host associated properties, and its strains have been detected from environmental samples like microbial consortia degrading aromatic compounds, marine sponges, polluted soil and a grass root consortium [23456]. The genome of B. petrii contains 5,287,950 base pairs, and has been observed with greatest numbers of expressed virulence factors [7]. Infectious diseases like mandibular osteomyelitis [8], suppurative mastoiditis [9], chronic pulmonary diseases [10], respiratory infection in case of bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis [1112] have been reported due to B. petrii infection. Again, exposure to soil or water containing B. petrii may lead to local colonization and eventually serious nosocomial infections [1314]. Some other bacteria like Escherichia coli [15], Pseudomonas aeruginosa [16], Chlamydophila pneumoniae [17], Staphylococcus aureus [18], and Haemophilus influenzae [19] have also been identified as a cause for such types of infections. Many Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs have been used against these pathogens, but those drugs have less effect on B. petrii due to development of substantial resistance [10], generated an opportunity to identify a potential drug target as well as to discover a novel lead compound against B. petrii using computational techniques. Again, due to adverse effect of most of the anti-infectious drugs of synthetic origin, natural compounds with anti-infectious properties have been tested in both in vivo and in vitro to be an alternative approach towards the treatment. In this context, some of the natural compounds such as ajoene (Allium sativum), allicin (A. sativum), cinnamaldehyde (Cinnamomum cassia), curcumin (Curcuma longa), gallotannin (active component of green tea and red wine), isoorientin (Anthopterus wardii), isovitexin (A. wardii), neral (Melissa officinalis), and vitexin (A. wardii) have been acknowledged with anti-bacterial properties [202122232425]. Curcumin is a naturally occurring polyphenolic compound, a common component of Indian spice turmeric, having anti-tumor, anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties. It has been reported as an agent to reduce bacterial colony formation and inhibit lung cancer progression in high-risk chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients [20]. Similarly, gallotannin is an active component of green tea and red wine has been observed as a potent inhibitor of calcium-activated Cl– channel, may be used for the treatment of cystic fibrosis [21]. Again, in vitro study of three flavone C-glycosides such as isoorientin, vitexin, and isovitexin isolated from A. wardii have been reported as potent inhibitors for interleukin-8, and matrix metalloproteinase-1, an inflammatory marker in case of COPD [22]. Moreover, most of the bacterial infection caused due to formation of bio film in the host. In this regard, an active compound cinnamaldehyde of C. cassia have been identified as a strong inhibitor against quorum sensing (QS) biofilm formation due to E. coli, and Vibrio harveyi [23] infection. Similarly, two extracts of A. sativum namely allicin and ajoene have been accounted for inhibitory effect against P. aeruginosa and E. coli [24]. Likewise, neral is an active component of M. officinalis, has been reported as anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, and anti-oxidant properties against P. aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, S. aureus, and Citrobacter koseri infection [25], and may be applied for several infectious diseases including nosocomial infection. As, all of these nine natural compounds have been established with anti-bacterial properties, may be useful for treatment of B. petrii infection, encouraged authors to elucidate their inhibitory effect against the putative drug target of B. petrii through in silico approach.