CAD as one of the most cardiovascular disorders is the main cause of myocardial infarction [20]. Formation of fatty steaks and atherosclerotic plaques lead to the development of atherosclerosis [21, 22]. Moreover, different recent and important discoveries have demonstrated that increasing number of ncRNAs including lncRNAs and miRNAs have an effect on different diseases such as CVDs [23, 24]. Discovering the function of several lncRNAs in endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, macrophages, vascular, inflammation, and metabolism have shown that these RNAs can be involved in the progression of atherosclerosis and CAD [25, 26]. Also, aberrantly expression of these ncRNAs in CVD have an effect on the normal physiological condition. So, it seems that circulating lncRNAs have potential application in diagnosis and treatment of CVD [27, 28].
Aberrant expression of the HOTAIR has been examined in different diseases [29]. Querying the supplementary data derived from Cai et al.’s study [19] shows that HOTAIR is up regulated in CAD patients compared to non-CAD patients. The results have been achieved by a high throughput study. It motivated us to examine the HOTAIR expression in CAD patients compared to non-CAD patients by qRT-PCR.
Here, we found that the expression levels of HOTAIR were significantly up-regulated in patient’s blood samples compared with normal ones. The results of this study demonstrate a potential role of the HOTAIR in CAD.
Recently, HOTAIR has been implicated in CVDs, especially in aortic valve calcification. Rinn et al. [30] emphasized that HOTAIR serves as a scaffold for two distinct histone modification complexes. Furthermore, Carrion et al. [31] found that HOTAIR levels are decreased in response to Leaflet stretch of aortic valve interstitial cells (AVICs). Based on the previous studies, more than half of the calcific aortic valve display bicuspid morphology symptoms. Human AVICs that exposed to stretch have a lower level of HOTAIR. Reducing the HOTAIR expression level via siRNA was followed by elevated expression of ALPL and BMP2 genes which are related to calcification [31]. Although Greco et al. [32] identified HOTAIR as one of the nine lncRNAs that are deregulated in heart failure [32], our results are inconsistent with the data presented by Cai et al. [19]. Our aim in this study is to emphasis on the enhanced expression of circulating HOTAIR in CAD patients compared to non-CAD patients for the first time. Altogether, the current study provides a viewpoint for further researches. More studies are required to approve the significance of HOTAIR and related genes as molecules involved in CAD. More experimental studies may reveal circulating lncRNAs as biomarkers or therapeutic targets in CVDs.