COPD, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, is a type of obstructive lung disease characterized by long-term poor airflow [1]. It is a general term referring to chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and refractory (non-reversible) asthma. These progressive lung diseases are commonly characterized by increased shortness of breath, frequent coughing, increased breathlessness, and wheezing. COPD may be caused by a variety of environmental factors, such as air pollution, secondhand smoke, dust, fumes, and chemicals [2]. It is expected that diverse causes and symptoms of COPD may lead to heterogeneous gene expression profiles in individual COPD patients, as mentioned by Wedzicha [3].
Currently, more than 70% of COPD patients suffer from limited physical activity, and 50% among them can not lead a normal life [4,5]. In 2015, COPD ranked as the third leading cause of death worldwide, and it is expected that the mortality from COPD will increase greatly by 2030 [1].
Smoking causes about 80% to 90% of all deaths from COPD [2]. Chemical compounds in tobacco smoke may impair immunity to respiratory infections and increase the risk of lung damage. The number of female COPD cases is increasing due to the use of tobacco in some high-income countries and exposure to air pollution in low-income countries [5]. However, 25% of all COPD patients are never-smokers or passive smokers [5]. Genetic factors also contribute to the development of COPD. For example, alpha-1 antitrypsin, a serum serine protease inhibitor, functions to protect the lung from neutrophil elastase, and its deficiency allows chronic, uninhibited inflammation in the lung, leading to emphysema, along with chronic bronchitis [6].
The prevalence of COPD is well documented. The diagnostic assessment of COPD, as proposed by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD), is based on 4 multiple factors, such as the patient’s level of symptoms, the extent of airflow obstruction, spirometric abnormality, and the identification of comorbidities [1]. About 12 million adults in the United States are diagnosed with COPD, and 1% of them lose their life from it every year. Also, another 12 million people in the United States are regarded as having undiagnosed COPD [7]. However, most undiagnosed people are estimated to be in the mild or moderate stage of COPD and are not likely to be detected. Many case studies have considered alternative diagnostic aspects, which do not seem enough to cover the whole spectrum of COPD [2,8]. For example, inflammatory markers in COPD from the Bergen COPD cohort study have been used for the early diagnosis of COPD [9].
Recently, major biological and clinical discoveries have been allowed by great technical advances in next-generation sequencing techniques. Kim et al. [10] analyzed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data of 98 COPD lung tissue samples and 91 normal samples classified by the GOLD definition. In this study, they identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and isoforms (DEIs) between COPD and normal tissue. But, DEGs and DEIs could not be used for distinguishing COPD from normal tissue, probably due to the heterogeneity of the COPD samples.
Here, we established a new transcriptome analysis pipeline to remove heterogeneity and find suitable markers to clearly separate COPD from normal tissue. The removal of heterogeneity enabled us to detect emergent gene expression changes and protein interaction subnetworks that were missed in the previous study. Especially, the importance of mitochondrial proteins was revitalized through our analysis regarding co-expression relationships and changes in the subcellular localization of proteins. The analysis pipeline used in this study could be used to classify heterogeneous gene expression profiles and predict potential candidates for COPD pathogenesis.