It has become known that human genomes differ more as a consequence of structural variation than of single-base-pair differences [1-4]. Structural genomic variants, mainly in the form of copy number variants (CNVs), have recently been rediscovered as contributors to evolution and as pathoetiologic elements for complex human diseases [5, 6]. However, so far, there are not many CNV-based genome-wide association studies or population genetics studies compared with the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based counterparts. One notable CNV-based population genetics study was done by Jakobsson et al. [7]. They applied SNP, haplotype, and CNV information to reveal the structures of 29 world-wide populations. Even though their CNVs were not as effective as SNPs or haplotypes in discriminating those populations, the authors showed the potential to apply this information to human genetic studies. Other examples of CNV-based disease susceptibility studies are systemic autoimmunity diseases [8, 9], psoriasis [10], and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and progression to acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) [11]. Disease could affect the patterns of CNV diversity via natural selection, and higher copy numbers of the immunoregulatory and inflammatory cytokine gene CCL3L1, for example, are associated with lower risks of HIV infection and the progression to AIDS [11]; furthermore, in a genome-wide study, the level of population differentiation at this locus was found to be extraordinary compared to that of other CNVs, suggesting that natural selection may have influenced CCL3L1 copy number in humans [3].
The traditional FST measure is useful for identifying regions of the genome affected by natural selection. In a recently published review paper, Holsinger and Weir define Wright's F-statistics (FST in particular) [12] and describe methods-of-moment estimates and how FST estimates should be interpreted [13]. Although the authors also mention the maximum likelihood Bayesian estimates of FST, their description is very limited in identifying genomic regions under selection and do not present an application to the datasets. They simply compared locus-specific estimates of FST with its genome-wide distribution, and therefore, probabilities are not attached to those with a higher FST.
Here, we outline the steps that constitute testing for outlier loci in population datasets by the maximum likelihood Bayesian method, using BayeScan computer software [14] (Note that the terms of locus and CNV are used interchangeably in this paper). The logic for determining outlier loci is simple. If natural selection favors one allele over others at a particular locus in some populations, the FST at that locus will be larger than at loci in which among-population differences are purely a result of genetic drift. Therefore, genome scans that compare single-locus estimates of FST with the genome-wide background might identify regions of the genome that have been subjected to diversifying selection [15].
We will demonstrate FST estimation by maximum likelihood Bayesian method with the publicly available high-resolution CNV dataset generated by Conrad et al. [4]. We will also show that this method identifies several genomic regions showing signals of natural selection. Even though we focus mainly on the CNV data here, the detailed steps of analysis are analogous for other types of molecular marker data, such as microsatellites, SNPs, and amplified fragment-length polymorphisms.