Using viral metagenomic approaches, viral diversity and abundance have been investigated in various natural ecosystems in Korea, including rice paddy soil, fermented foods, the human gut, seawater, and the near-surface atmosphere (Table 1). The morphologies of environmental viruses have been imaged using transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 2). Sipho- and podo-like tailed viruses were found in fermented foods (Fig. 2A-2C), while non-tailed small viruses were detected in the near-surface atmosphere (Fig. 2G-2I). Various types of tailed, non-tailed, circular, and long linear viruses were found in the human gut (Fig. 2D-2F). In general, the virions ranged in size from 30 to 60 nm. In agreement with the results of previous viral metagenomic studies [23, 31], over half of the sequences in the Korean environmental viromes were described as orphan sequences, based on comparisons with viral proteins in public databases (Table 1). Most of the sequences identified were assigned to the Siphoviridae, Podoviridae, and Myoviridae families of dsDNA viruses and the Circoviridae, Germiniviridae, Nanoviridae, and Microviridae families of ssDNA viruses (Fig. 3). The first viral metagenomic study in Korea surveyed uncultured viral assemblages in rice paddy soil in 2008 [10], where MDA was used with phi29 DNA poly merase and random hexaprimers to amplify viral DNA and to construct clone libraries for metagenome sequencing. The soil was found to contain a rich pool of unknown ssDNA viruses and dsDNA viruses. This study also focused on the effect of MDA amplification on different types of genomic DNA and showed that MDA preferentially amplified circular DNA genomes. This was also demonstrated using an environmental sample from surface seawater [12], where dsDNA viruses alone were retrieved in the LASL library, whereas ssDNA viruses were overwhelmingly represented in the MDA library. Thus, the amplification methods used in viral metagenomics can affect the ratios of viral sequences greatly and lead to inaccurate estimates of viral diversity.
Next, Park et al. [11] investigated the abundance and diversity of uncultured viral assemblages in fermented shrimp, kimchi, and sauerkraut-fermented foods that have been consumed for a long time around the world. In contrast to the soil virome, dsDNA bacteriophages from the families Myoviridae, Podoviridae, and Siphoviridae dominated the fermented foods, and they contained a low complexity of viral assemblages compared with other environmental habitats, such as seawater, human feces, marine sediment, and soil. However, it is possible that the viral diversity of the viromes detected in fermented foods may have been constrained to dsDNA viruses by the LASL method.
A large number of unknown microbes, such as bacteria, archaea, microbial eukarya, and viruses, constitute up to 1012 bacteria per gram of feces in the human gastrointestinal tract [33], and it is expected that gut viruses will affect the relationships among viruses, bacteria, and gut epithelial cells [34]. Kim et al. [13] investigated the abundance and diversity of DNA viruses in fecal samples from five healthy Koreans, particularly ssDNA viruses. Using epifluorescence microscopy with SYBR Gold staining [35], the viral abundance ranged from 108 to 109 per gram of feces, which was 10-fold less than the bacterial abundance in many other environments that harbored 10-100-fold more viruses (e.g., aquatic environments). Moreover, the diversity of gut viral assemblages was lower than that of gut bacteria. These results support Reyes et al. [29], who found that viral-microbial interactions in the human intestine could not be described as a predator-prey relationship, and instead, it was referred to as "kill the winner," which was driven by a lytic life cycle.
Airborne viruses are now regarded as major environmental risk factors for complex disease pathogenesis [36-38]. However, the atmosphere remains "one of the last frontiers of biological exploration on Earth" [9]. Using viral metagenomics with an advanced airborne particle sampling system, Whon et al. [9] conducted the first study of the diversity and community composition of airborne viruses in the near-surface atmosphere. The viral abundance in the atmosphere exhibited seasonal changes (increasing from autumn to winter before decreasing until spring) in the range of 106 to 107 viruses per m3, and the temporal variations in viral abundance were inversely correlated with seasonal changes in temperature and absolute humidity. Plant-associated ssDNA geminivirus-related viruses and animal-infecting circoviruses dominated the viral assemblages, with low numbers of nanoviruses and microphages in air viromes, which suggests that airborne viral assemblages are affected greatly by terrestrial plants and animal activities.
The compositions of viral assemblages are determined by how the virome is amplified. Thus, the compositions of the viral assemblages detected in fermented foods and marine samples are biased toward dsDNA viruses, such as sipho-, podo-, and myophages, when the LASL method is used, whereas the viral assemblages detected in rice paddy soil, human gut, marine, and near-surface atmosphere samples contain high proportions of ssDNA viral sequences, due to the use of MDA, as shown in Fig. 3. In addition, the compositions of the viral assemblages characterized in Korean environments tend to depend on their specific microbial features. The human gastrointestinal tract and fermented foods are exposed to massive numbers of gut bacteria and lactic acid bacteria, respectively [39-41]. By contrast, the atmosphere contains far less cellular metabolism and reproductive activity than other environments, such as the soil, seawater, fermented foods, and the human gut [42]. On this basis, the lowest abundance of eukaryotic viruses was observed in the viral assemblages in the human gut and fermented foods, whereas a high abundance of eukaryotic viruses was detected in the near-surface atmosphere. High levels of prokaryote and eukaryote cells are present in rice paddy soil [43] and seawater [44], and so, comparable amounts of bacteriophages and eukaryotic viruses were detected in their viromes.