A. baumannii express high-affinity iron acquisition systems, such as siderophores, to survive under iron-limited host environments. The iron acquisition system that is mediated by the siderophore acinetobactin has been extensively characterized in A. baumannii. Especially, the gene cluster involved in the biosynthesis and transport of acinetobactin has been found in various clinical isolates of A. baumannii, except A. baumannii SDF [15]. Acinetobactin is synthesized from a DHBA, threonine, and hydroxyhistamine via proteins encoded by genes within the gene cluster. The mixed-type siderophore, which consists of catecholate and hydroxamate groups, exhibits high affinity for iron [16, 17]. Particularly, it has been found that 18 coding regions in the chromosome of A. baumannii ATCC 19606 are required for acinetobactin biosynthesis and the uptake of ferric-acinetobactin complexes [15, 18]. The acinetobactin gene cluster of A. baumannii ATCC 19606 is illustrated in Fig. 1. The acinetobactin-mediated iron acquisition system is composed of three putative systems encoded within the acinetobactin cluster. First, the biosynthesis of acinetobactin is accomplished by the proteins encoded by basA, basB, basC, basD, basF, basG, basH, basI, and basJ [14, 15]. Second, the acinetobactin that is produced by A. baumannii is secreted via a siderophore efflux system of the ABC superfamily, consisting of the proteins encoded by barA and barB [18]. Finally, ferric-acinetobactin complexes move into bacterial cells via a receptor for ferric-acinetobactin complexes, consisting of the proteins encoded by bauA, bauB, bauC, bauD, bauE, and bauF [14]. Especially, bauB, bauC, bauD, and bauE play important roles in the translocation of ferric-acinetobactin complexes into bacterial cells [15]. In addition, putative binding sites for ferric uptake regulator, which controls bacterial iron homeostasis, exist in the upstream regions of basJ, entE/basD, basA/bauF, and bauD/basD. All of these genes that are involved in the biosynthesis and transport of acinetobactin are significantly up-regulated under iron-limited conditions [15]. Particularly, a functional analysis of basD, bauA, and bauD mutants under iron-limited conditions showed that iron acquisition that is mediated by the biosynthesis and transport of acinetobactin is essential for the survival of A. baumannii under iron-limited conditions [13].
Moreover, a recent study by Gaddy et al. [13] indicated that BasD and BauA play important roles in the persistence of infection by A. baumannii within epithelial cells and their apoptotic death. The results obtained from a mouse sepsis model also showed that the acinetobactin-mediated iron acquisition system is a major factor in the pathogenesis of A. baumannii, such as the establishment of bacterial infection and cell damage. Especially, impairment of BasD production resulted in an intermediate virulence phenotype in ex vivo and in vivo infection models in comparison to those of the parental strain and bauA mutant. These results represent that both acinetobactin synthesis and uptake of iron-acinetobactin complexes are absolutely required for the pathogenesis of A. baumannii.