Dissecting the tumor heterogeneity
The data complexity comes not only from the heterogeneous or biased sample composition, but also from the innate complexity of tumor biology. Previously, mounting evidence has shown the enormous heterogeneity of tumors at the molecular level. The tumor heterogeneity can be explained by two hypothetical models. One is the clonal segregation model with a multi-step process, and the other is the cancer stem cell theory. The cancer stem cell model describes the heterogeneous cellular origin of cancers from primitive progenitor cells to mature differentiated cells, which may contribute to tumor heterogeneity. In this context, genomic profiling studies could define the cancer subpopulation harboring stem-like traits in various cancer types, supporting the cancer stem cell theory [32, 33]. Similarly, we also defined the bilineal trait in a subpopulation of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by comparing the gene expression profiles of HCC and cholangiocarcinoma (CC) [34]. This result showed the continuous liver cancer spectrum between HCC and CC, suggesting that stem-like or de-differentiation traits may give rise to the heterogeneous progression of HCC. We also suggested that the dysfunction of p53 machinery is associated with the acquisition of the stemness trait in HCC [35]. Recently, this association could be validated by showing p53 knockout mouse model can give rise to bilineal liver cancers [36].
In addition, various host factors may contribute to tumor heterogeneity. Interactions of the tumor cells with host eco-system, such as innate immune systems, or the reactions of surrounding microenvironment against the tumor may affect the tumor behaviors [37]. Thus, the proper detection of biomarkers might be difficult without considering the effect of host factors. Furthermore, the intratumoral heterogeneity of cancers have been notified in detail by genome-wide sequencing of multi-loci from the same tumor [38]. The comparison of primary and metastatic tumors by single cell sequencing also revealed the sequential mutation process during cancer progression [39]. Similarly, the comparison of mutations from multiple HCC tumors in the same patient could define the evolutionary lineage among tumors cells [40]. Strikingly, the development of single-cell sequencing technology could provide a more detailed and systematic view on intra-tumoral heterogeneity [41, 42]. Of interest, such attempts enabled the construction of phylogenic trees from mutational heterogeneity, which revealed evolutionary tumor growth opening a new field of "cancer evolution".