Cirsium japonicum var. spinossimum is a wild perennial herb that grows in the mountains and fields of Jeju Island, South Korea, and is also found in Japan. This species is often compared to a similar herb called C. japonicum DC [7]. In Korea, this herb is known for its medicinal properties, including its antihaemorrhagic, antihypertensive, antihepatitic, and uretic medicinal properties [2]. Since the advent of next generation technology, this research tool has become important for the generation of vast information regarding genomic and transcriptomic data. These data eventually help infer various basic biological, molecular and cellular processes, especially in non-model organisms and non-sequenced genomes [22–24]. Thus far, no studies have performed a transcriptome analysis of this herb. We characterized the transcriptome of C. japonicum var. spinossimum using an Illumina Hiseq2500. This study represents the first report of the whole transcriptome and differential gene expression among the flower, leaf, and root tissues in C. japonicum var. spinossimum and provides insight into fundamental molecular data.
We obtained 66,078,874 reads after trimming and performing error corrections, and these reads assembled into 51,133 unigenes with an average length of 648 bp (Table 1). The number of mapped transcripts in each tissue was 24,663, 34,031, and 19,545 in the flower, leaf, and root tissues, respectively (Table 2). We obtained unigenes that ranged from 200 to 15,402 bp (Fig. 1), which is comparable to similar RNA-Seq reports [25–27]. This number also represents the high quality of our generated data. Although prior genome information for C. japonicum is lacking, the BLASTX program successfully annotated 33,525 (65.59%) transcripts. The highest similarity obtained with Cynara cardunculus var. scolymus, is a medicinal plant belonging to same family (Asteraceae) [28, 29]. Thus, the C. japonicum transcriptome can prove useful for functional gene studies or molecular biology studies investigating C. japonicum. Of the 17,583 mapped transcripts, the KEGG classification annotated 9,418 (53.56%) transcripts into several pathways (Table 3), but no functional annotation was found for the remaining 46.44% of the assembled unigenes. This might be due to one of the following reasons: either the unigenes matched proteins with unknown functions or they did not have any homologous sequence matches in the database. Thus, these unknown unigenes may be highly important for further research since they may be considered novel transcripts.
The DEG patterns were investigated to further profile the global gene expression differences among the leaf, flower and root in C. japonicum. The most abundant genes were expressed in the leaves, followed by the flowers and roots (Fig. 4). We obtained 26,289 genes that were expressed in all three tissues, including 14,075 genes that were specifically expressed in the leaf tissues, 3,611 genes that were specifically expressed in the flower tissues and 1,715 genes that were specifically expressed in the root tissues. The molecular function category showed that more than 40% of the unigenes were expressed in all three tissues (Supplementary Figs. 2–4). The major categories in which differential gene expression was observed were biological process and cellular components.
Silymarin is a main component in C. japonicum that contributes to its medicinal value. Therefore, we aimed to expand our knowledge by identifying putative unigenes that contribute to the product. Silymarin is reportedly produced via the oxidative coupling of two major precursors, namely, taxifolin and coniferyl alcohol [21]. Most major enzymes responsible to produce both taxifolin and coniferyl alcohol were present in our transcriptome data (Supplementary Table 2), which is consistent with other medicinal plants observed in the same family [6, 20]. In the C. japonicum transcriptome assembly, we identified silymarin biosynthesis-related unigenes (Fig. 5), and their differential expression was assessed (Fig. 6). Compared to their expression in the flower and root tissues, these genes were highly expressed in the leaf tissues. Silymarin biosynthesis has been reported to be lacking in the flower of S. marianum [6].
In addition to these unigenes, unigenes encoding enzymes crucial for the biosynthesis of antibiotics and the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites were identified. Medicinal plants represent a rich source of secondary metabolites [30, 31], and their data could be useful for molecular biology research and the mass production of significant metabolites.
This report represents the first de novo assembly of the transcriptome of C. japonicum var. spinossimum obtained from the Korean Peninsula. This study provides resources for comparative transcriptomics, especially in the field of the biochemical and molecular biosynthesis pathways of silymarin. In total, 51,133 unigenes were obtained with a mean length of 648.36 bp. In total, 33,525 annotated sequences were assigned to 64 GO functional groups, and 10,535 unigenes were assigned to 107 KEGG pathways. The DEG analysis revealed that the highest numbers of genes were expressed in the leaf tissues. Candidate genes that might be involved in silymarin biosynthesis may help further functional genomic and transcriptomic analyses in C. japonicum. Putative unigenes that facilitate the production of taxifolin and coniferyl alcohol, which are the major precursors in silymarin biosynthesis, were identified. This work will contribute to the comprehensive knowledge of new traditional medicinal plants for growers and consumers and provides additional characteristics and information regarding the pharmaceutical benefits associated with silymarin biosynthesis.