The early-life microbiota contains a unique microbial communities consisting of numerous bacteria and viruses. This microbiota has identified by using different kinds of technologies including 16S rRNA sequencing. The gut microbiota is linked to risk for various conditions in inflammatory diseases, asthma, obesity, glucose intolerance, and type 2 diabetes [35-37].
Over the last decades, the paradigm of a sterile condition in utero is shifting to the possibility of the prenatal maternal-fetal coexist with commensal and symbiotic microbes [38]. Recent studies also support a prenatal microbial milieu through bacterial presentation in placenta, amniotic fluid, umbilical cord, and meconium [39]. In addition, there are emerging reports of the prenatal microbial composition on fetal and postnatal development. However, concerns have raised by molecular based approaches, therefore it is needed for appropriate controls to account for DNA contamination or bacterial viability [40].
A maternal condition during pregnancy and postnatal period can provide a critical window for susceptibility to microbiome development through the environmental factors such as mode of delivery and maternal diet (Fig. 1). The delivery mode has a crucial function in the early gut microbiota composition. Infants by vaginally delivery have higher levels of intestinal Bacteroides, Lactobacilli, and Bifidobacterium, which are commonly present in vaginal route, whereas infants by caesarean section (C-section) have higher level of Enterococcus, and Clostridium from skin, oral or hospital environment [41]. C-section born infants have shown to an increased risk of immune disorder such as asthma and allergy and obesity [42,43]. It has been revealed that neonates born by C-section exhibited significantly higher global DNA methylation levels in leucocytes [44] and CD34+ cell [45] compared with those born vaginally.
Gestational age is another important influencer for gut microbiome development [7,8]. It was reported that the gut microbiota of preterm infants has shown to delayed colonization by limited microbial diversity and ths risk of gut dysbiasis. The gut microbiota composition of preterm infants has Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Escherichia, and Klebsiella predominantly and relatively low level of gammaproteobacteria than those in full term infants [46].
Breastfeeding have been reported to influence the infant microbiota. It was reported that microbiome involved the effects of DNA methylation through breast milk, which influences the gut microbiome community composition. Breastfeeding during this period is associated with greater Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium, which are folate producers, thereby affecting DNA methylation regulated by methyl-donor [47]. Also, breast milk oligosaccharides alter hut microbiome community that secrete short-chain fatty acid. Therefore, the strain of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus by breastfeeding could make intestinal contents more acidic with short-chain fatty acids, which modulate a defense mechanism against pathogens and epigenetic effects [48].