The GWAS is a powerful method to identify genomic variants affecting traits. Many studies have found important SNPs associated with diseases. However, the study is not well suited to identify rare variants or small effects of several SNPs [18]. Here, we tried to find haplotype blocks in 7 Korea individuals that harbor SNPs that are significantly associated with BMI in a Korean population. The significant SNPs for BMI were detected through GWASs, and the haplotypes were discovered by analyzing the NGS data. We selected short reads within the LD ranges that encompassed the significant SNPs from the GWAS results, and the heterozygous variants that were called from those reads were phased, based on the paired-end information. As a result, we detected 44 haplotype blocks harboring SNPs that are significantly associated with BMI in Koreans. The haplotypes may affect BMI in Korea individuals. However, it is not statically powerful, due to the small number of samples (7 individuals) used in this study. Actually, the alleles of a haplotype need to be compared with those of the haplotype of the same range in other individuals to have high accuracy. We could not follow this strategy. For example, most of the haplotypes found by this analysis were discovered in a single individual. In our small dataset, a significant SNP from a GWAS is not likely to be shared by several individuals, because many SNPs have a minor allele frequency of around 10% in a population. This problem may be solved if a large dataset is used. In addition, read depth also reduces accuracy. In Table 2, several haplotypes were identified in a single GWA LD block. These haplotypes could not be joined, as there were not enough short reads that could bridge them using the phase function in Samtools. In addition, AK7 has the GATX haplotype at bps 57903745, 57904011 (rs590654), 57904088 (rs590215), and 57907787 in chromosome 18, and AK4 has XAXC in the same locus. An X represents a missing allele, probably due to low coverage. We were able to recover them, as Samtools was still able to phase them. We filled in these alleles manually to build the haplotype. In Table 2, the green letters represent such alleles that have been filtered by read depth and recovered manually. Although the accuracy is not high, this integrative method has several advantages. First, rare variants can be detected. For example, AK4 has the TT risk allele haplotype at bps 57895600 and 57900630 in chromosome 18. The former was associated with BMI and was registered in the dbSNP database, while the latter was not registered in the dbSNP database. Bp 57900630 is possibly a low-frequency risk allele, which is difficult to be detected by GWAS. Second, we can explain a trait systematically. rs559623 is an SNP (C/A: forward strand) that is associated with BMI. It may act with bp 57844375 in chromosome 18 as CC according to our results (Table 2). Traits can be explained properly by multiple variants. Finally, this method is useful for studying phasing. Many SNPs from an array or NGS reads are unphased genotypes. However, the bulk of SNP information needs to be phased for identifying co-located alleles. While GATK HaplotypeCaller, Samtools Phase, and Beagle are used to phase variants, there are several problems, such as the long execution time and the need for large system memory. In fact, it takes too long to phase entire chromosomes or a single chromosome. However, with this method, it is possible to analyze efficiently with regard to time and memory, as it does not consider reference and genotype data of the entire chromosome. This method focuses only on the data within regions that are nearby important variants from the GWA analysis results. We constructed a crucial haplotype catalog for BMI traits in Korean individuals by integratively analyzing NGS data and GWA analysis data.