In the current study, a fosmid cloning strategy was used to assess the microbial populations in the ISS drinking water system-namely, samples from the Prebiocide and Tank A. Initially, no microbes could be cultivated, and conventional PCR reactions failed to amplify 16S rDNA fragments from low biomass samples. Therefore, randomly primed RCA was used to amplify any DNA present in the samples, followed by size selection using PFGE. Genomic DNA amplification was performed using the DNA isolated from concentrated DNA samples obtained from Prebiocide and Tank A drinking water samples in the ISS.
We used the GenomiPhi DNA Amplification Kit from Amersham; the DNA amplification experiments using a Φ29 DNA polymerase proved to be ideal for the scarce amount of genomic starting material available. However, nonspecific amplification can occur either in the presence or in the absence of the DNA template in the reaction. For the lambda DNA sample, the presence of amplified DNA can be confirmed if the Φ29 DNA polymerase is specific to the template DNA by digestion with restriction enzymes. Lambda DNA (48.5 kb) has many HindIII restriction sites, producing a unique distribution of sizes. However, even in the case of lambda DNA, we confirmed that some amount of indigestible amplified DNA still exists, which appears to be due to nonspecific amplification and/or partial amplification (Fig. 2B). According to the Amersham kit user manual, the enzyme synthesizes single-stranded DNA or double-stranded DNA. An alternative explanation is that there were many single-stranded DNA fragments that could not be cut by restriction enzymes. To test this theory, the amplified DNA was denatured at 95℃ for 3 min and reannealed at room temperature for 30 min to decrease the amount of single-stranded DNA. However, restriction digestion still resulted in a large amount of indigestible DNA (data not shown).
Using the concentrated water samples also proved that such samples had sufficient DNA, which could be used to amplify genomic DNA by using commercially available kits, even when only a few microbes were present. Nevertheless, amplification of genomic DNA may require some additional DNA preparation steps, because boiling cells for a short time may not effectively release the genomic DNA for use as template. We decreased the incidence of nonspecific amplification by reducing the incubation time to less than 12 h when it was possible to use the amplified DNA as a template.
The amplified high-molecular-weight DNA obtained from the Prebiocide, Tank A, and control samples was cloned into fosmid vectors. Several hundred clones were randomly selected for sequencing, which was followed by Blastn/Blastx searches (Table 2, Supplementary Table 1). Sequences encoding specific genes from Burkholderia, a species abundant in soil and groundwater, were obtained for both the Prebiocide and Tank A samples [23, 29]. Bradyrhizobium and Mesorhizobium, belonging to rhizobia, a large community of nitrogen fixers often found in association with plant roots, were present in the Prebiocide library [27]. Ralstonia, which is prevalent in soils with a high heavy metal content, was detected in the Tank A library [28]. Giardia lamblia is a common cause of diarrhea in humans, and the presence of homologous protein sequences with the protein encoded by G. lamblia in Tank A samples warrants further study [30].
The current NASA technologies used for treating drinking water in the ISS are effective in removing viable cultivable microbes. Conventional PCR failed to detect any amplifiable rRNA genes, which suggests that the purification of this drinking water was satisfactory. However, the amplification of naked DNA from these samples enabled elucidation of the microbial diversity in the samples. When drinking water was not treated with a biocide, protein sequences from diverse genera could be retrieved. The detection of many unidentified sequences (data not shown) also suggests the presence of potentially novel microbial fingerprints. The bacterial diversity observed in this pilot study with the fosmid approach was greater than that observed with conventional 16S rRNA gene sequencing.