Completion of human genome sequencing was announced on April 2003. Reading of 99% of the gene-containing part of the human sequence was finished to 99.99% accuracy [10]. However, in a true sense, the human genome sequence had (and has) not been finished. There are still many gaps in the "reference" sequence-for example, in the centromeres-and given the variation of the human genome sequence, many must wonder what the completion of sequencing the human genome is in the first place.
After completion of the sequencing of the human genome, our center, SRC, joined The International HapMap Project from its start. The project was launched in October 2002 to create a public, genome-wide database of common human sequence variations, providing information needed as a guide to genetic studies of clinical phenotypes [2]. The HapMap Project is a natural extension of the HGP. While the reference sequence of the genome constructed by the HGP is informative about the vast majority of bases that are invariant across individuals, HapMap focuses on DNA sequence differences among individuals. The main genome researchers in the world got together and made an infrastructure of the association study-i.e., a database of 1 million genetic variations for 4 representative populations: Africans, European Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese. The Africans were the Yoruba people in Ibadan, Nigeria. The European Caucasians were a Utah, USA population with Northern and Western European ancestry collected in 1980 by the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH). The Chinese consisted of unrelated Han Chinese in Beijing, China. The Japanese were unrelated self-identified Japanese living in Tokyo, Japan. In the HapMap Project, we are proud to say that SRC made the World No. 1 contribution as a research group by genotyping ~1/4 of the genome (Table 1).
HapMap data document the generality of hotspots of recombination, a block-like structure of linkage disequilibrium and low haplotype diversity, leading to substantial correlations of SNPs with many of their neighbors [11]. There is the extensive redundancy among nearby SNPs, providing the potential to extract extensive information about genomic variation without complete re-sequencing, as well as efficiencies through selection of tag SNPs and optimized association analyses.