Medication adherence is generally defined as the extent to which patient take medications to coincide with the healthcare provider's recommendation [1]. Adherence to long-term treatment in chronic disease, such as hypertension and diabetes, is essential for reducing the risks of disease comorbidity and mortality [2]. Poor adherence to medication can cause worsening of disease, death, and increased financial burden for society [1]. Most cases of hypertension and diabetes are inextirpable. The main goal of treatment for these chronic diseases is to delay disease progression and to prevent developing complications. Thus, medication adherence is one of the most important factors for success in lifelong treatment [3]. However, medication non-adherence in chronic disease averages 50% [4]. The World Health Organization reported that non-adherence is a leading cause of preventable death and cost. Predictors of poor adherence are a useful indicator for physicians to identify patients who are most in need of interventions to improve adherence [1]. Illness perceptions and self-efficacy are powerful predictors of adherence [2]. These health-related cognitions have associations with personality, and personality traits can be conveniently summarized by a five-factor model of personality (conscientiousness, neuroticism, agreeableness, extraversion, and openness) [5]. Several studies have explored the associations between personality and adherence. Among the 12 previous publications exploring associations between personality traits and medication adherence, 7 studies reported that medication adherence has been positively related to conscientiousness, 5 studies reported negative relationships with neuroticism, 2 studies reported about agreeableness with positive associations, and 1 study reported a positive relationship with extraversion [6, 7, 8]. A genetic basis of personality traits has been identified from behavior genetic studies. Twin, adoption, and family studies show that heritability of personality is about 50% [9]. Several studies have attempted to identify candidate genes with five dimensions of personality, but the results were inconclusive. Genetic linkage studies have suggested only a few genomic regions for personality traits. The genetic influences on personality traits are likely attributable to many genes with small effects. Few genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified genetic variants associated with personality traits. However, most of the associations with personality traits could not be replicated, except in one study [8]. Unlike the attempts to elucidate the genomic associations of personality, there is no research on the genetic aspect of medication adherence until now. We assumed that medication adherence has a genetic background, as the personality traits that affect medication adherence have a genetic basis for heritability. Therefore, we conducted a GWAS to identify the association between medication adherence and genotype.