Estimating and partitioning genetic variance using SNP data
We estimated the genetic relationship matrix (GRM) between all pairs of individuals from all genotyped SNPs For each trait, we then estimated the variance that can be captured by all SNPs using the restricted maximum likelihood approach in a mixed linear model: y = Xb + gG + e
where y is a vector of phenotypes, b is a vector of fixed effects with its incidence matrix X, and gG is a vector of aggregate effects of all SNPs. Var(gG) = AGσ2G
AG is the SNP-derived GRM, and σ2G is the additive genetic variance. The proportion of variance explained by all SNPs is defined as h2G = σ2G σσ2p
σ2p is the phenotypic variance. Details of the model and parameter estimation have been described elsewhere [1011]. When we estimated genetic variance using SNP data, we have to consider seasonal effects (winter, December–February; spring, March–May; summer, June–August; and autumn, September–November based on birth date) as environmental effects, because milk production traits are closely related to season. Then, we performed ANOVA test to investigate the relationship between each trait (parity 1 and 2) and seasonal effect. Milk fat had only a close relation to season in the ANOVA test of both parity 1 (p = 0.0267) and 2 (p = 0.000432). We counted on seasonal effect in only the analysis including milk fat. In addition, using the same method as above but allowing multiple genetic components to be fit simultaneously in the model, we partitioned h2G into the contributions of genic (h2Gg) and intergenic (h2Gi) regions of the whole genome across all traits. The genic regions were defined as ±0 kb of the 3' and 5' untranslated regions (UTRs). A total of 13,297 SNPs were located within the boundaries of 7001 protein-coding genes for this definition (±0 kb). The total length of the 7001 protein-coding genes was approximately 585 Mb, which covered 21.91% of the genome. We performed these estimating and partitioning genetic variance using SNP data through GCTA [11].