Quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping has been widely used to discover underlying genetic factors that can explain particular phenotypes of interest. Thanks to DNA microarray technology, the expression phenotype of thousands of genes was associated with the genotypes across the whole genome in expression QTL mapping [1234567]. Recent advent of next-generation sequencing technology has enabled a genetic profiling of chromatin traits as well as more in-depth analyses of gene expression variation. Especially, the mechanisms controlling chromatin accessibility have been of particular interest because of their importance in a wide spectrum of DNA regulation processes. For example, Degner et al. [8] utilized DNaseI hypersensitivity assay coupled with high-throughput sequencing (DNase-seq) to map genome-wide chromatin accessibility to the genotypes across 70 human individuals, for which a previous RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq)-based expression QTL study revealed new insights into the genetic regulation of transcription [5]. In yeast, expression QTL mapping has been performed for the genetic dissection of transcription regulation in a cross between two parental strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (BY4716 and RM11-1a) based on DNA microarrays [1291011]. In order to generate a matched dataset of chromatin accessibility for this set of yeast individuals, we carried out Formaldehyde-Assisted Isolation of Regulatory Elements followed by sequencing (FAIRE-seq) for a total of 96 segregants from the cross of BY4716 and RM11-1a [12].
In this study, we sought to dissect the genetic architecture of the regulation of gene expression and chromatin accessibility by analysing previous data generated in yeast and human based on different technical platforms and experimental designs. Our main goal was to find differences in the overall regulatory structure between open chromatin and gene expression. We were also interested to determine whether the two distant species, namely yeast and human, would be different in genetic regulatory architecture and to estimate the effect of the technical or experimental differences in genotyping and measuring the quantitative traits.