Retrotransposon insertion polymorphism
Almost half of the human genome comprises retrotransposons. Although they were overlooked for a significant period of time in our genetic study, their importance in chromosome structure, gene regulation, and disease predisposition has now been well established. Retroelements are widely divided into two categories-one with long terminal repeats (LTRs) and another without the LTRs. Short and long interspersed repeat elements (SINEs and LINEs, respectively) are two of the major classes of non-LTR retroelements, while SINEs are the more abundant class. Among SINEs, Alu is the predominant type of retroelement. Among all Alus found in the entire human genome, only about 0.5% is found to be present in the human genome but absent in orthologous regions of other primates and are thus identified as human-specific. This 'young' group of Alus is composed of only about 5,000 Alu elements that are believed to have integrated in the human genome after the divergence of humans and great apes [64-68]. Studying the retrotransposon insertion loci in Neanderthals will identify truly modern human-specific retrotransposon insertion polymorphisms. A similar comparative analysis would reveal other transposable elements, such as L1, SVAs, and HERVs, that are specific to modern humans only, as well as those that are specific to Neanderthals. Retroelements are particularly important in population genetics. It is extremely rare that a newly inserted transposable element is completely excised; thus, they act as a genetic fossil that is homoplasy-free. This identical-by-descent nature of retroelements makes them better markers for population and evolutionary studies than SNPs, in the sense that SNPs can, though rarely, be mutated back to the previous state. SNPs are also very hard to detect while handling ancient genomes due to transformation and deamination [69], while retrotransposon insertion polymorphisms (RIPs) refer to the presence or absence of a retrotransposon. Once a retrotransposon is inserted at a new location in an individual, it is subject to genetic drift. Over a short period, it starts spreading in to the population. Depending on when a retroelement has integrated at a certain locus, it will be shared by different species or, if recently enough, by different populations of the same species. Thus, RIPs occurring before the divergence of chimps and humans are shared by humans and chimps, but those occurring after are present only in humans. RIPs that are even more recent are specific to certain human populations only [70, 71]. For instance, some RIPs are found only in Africans, some in Han Chinese, and so on. The detailed information about all polymorphic retroelements and their frequency in different populations is extensively cataloged in the dbRIP database [43]. The identical-by-descent and homoplasy-free nature of RIPs makes them useful genetic markers in population and evolutionary genetics. The specificity of RIPs can play a significant role in answering the question of admixture of Neanderthals and modern humans. Finding RIPs that are shared between Neanderthals and non-African populations but not present in African populations can be considered solid support for the proposed admixture between Neanderthals and non-African populations. In an ongoing study in our laboratory, over 500 RIPs were identified to be present in Khoisan and Bantu individuals, who represent the oldest lineage of modern humans from Southern Africa, but not in the reference human genome (unpublished). These oldest African lineage-specific RIPs theoretically should also be absent from Neanderthals.