The lung is a major organ involved in the critical function of respiration. In addition, the lung is also involved in removal of pathogens such as influenza and Mycobacterium as well as detoxification of environmental chemical pollutants accumulated in respiratory tissue [1-3]. Lung tissue contains airway and parenchyma compartments with more than 30 cell types including fibroblast, endothelial, epithelial, smooth muscle and macrophages [4-6]. Alveolar epithelium consists of two morphologically distinct type I and type II cells representing approximately 95% and 5% of the alveolar surface area, respectively [7]. Considerable progress has been made in understanding the role of type II cells in lung function and disease. Lung epithelium plays an important and active role in influenza virus and CD8+ T-cell mediated lung injury [8,9]. Surfactant is composed of phospholipids, proteins and carbohydrates and is mainly produced by lung type II cells. Surfactant promotes lung expansion, reduces edema and surface tension [10]. Lung type II cells participate in vesicular transport, lipid metabolism and detoxification. Furthermore, type II cells can undergo cell proliferation and transdifferentiate into type I cells in response to lung injury [11]. The development of type I and type II cell-selective monoclonal antibodies to apical surface membrane proteins such as T1-α and MMC4 facilitated investigating the role of lung epithelium in lung injury and repair [12,13]. Cell specific expression of a small number of genes such as surfactant proteins (SP-A, SP-B, and SP-C) in type II cells has been described [6,7]. Identification of sequence elements in the SP-C gene promoter and transcription factors that mediate tissue-specific expression in lung type II cells facilitated transgenic expression of heterologous genes [5,14]. Microarray technology allows for monitoring the transcriptional activity of several thousands of genes simultaneously [15]. Application of this technology to the lung developmental regulation, response to toxic chemicals and diseases have been described [16-18]. Furthermore, gene expression profile of human and mouse primary lung type II cells were reported [19-21]. Transcription factors are regulatory proteins that bind specific parts of the genome in tightly coiled structures called chromatin and regulate the availability of distinct stretches of DNA to be expressed in a tissue-specific manner. However, the role of transcription factors in the functional 2 organization of the mouse lung type II cell transcriptome is not well understood. The role of transcription factors such as Sox9 in pluripotent lung stem cells and AP1, activator transcription factor (ATF) in tissue-specific expression of Surfactant protein genes in type II cells has been demonstrated [22-24]. Isolation and characterization of lung stem cells capable of differentiating into alveolar epithelial type II cells has been described [22,25]. However, connecting the distinct profile of transcription factors and the gene expression within the transcriptome to elucidate biological functions of type II cells remains a major challenge. Gene knockout mice provided significant insights into the relative contribution of individual transcription factors into lung type II cell development and function [20,26,27]. Signal transduction pathways and transcriptional regulatory control of mouse lung type II cells were investigated using mouse lung and type II microarray data to gain novel insights into the biological organization of the transcriptome.