Despite the explosive increase in cancer genomics data, the actual application of genomics data and approach to clinics offers big challenges [1, 2]. The main reason for the delay in the application to clinics is non-connectivity between bioinformaticians, non-clinical scientists, and clinicians. Clinicians are not confident in how much additional information might be given through genomics technology compared to conventional tools, and non-clinical scientists and bioinformaticians are not aware of what clinical problems should be solved with priority.
Cancer clinicians expect novel diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic values of this new technology [1]. Now, the clinical field is aware that multiple assays using next-generation sequencing (NGS) has some advantage over single genetic tests [1, 3]. A recent cancer guideline from the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) pointed out that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and/or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) testing should be conducted as part of multiplex/NGS in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [4].
The feasibility of an NGS diagnostic platform at cancer clinics was validated by cancer centers in the United States [5] and Europe [6]. One platform showed that potential hurdles, time, cost, purity, and ethical problems could be overcome in implementing NGS using low-coverage whole-genome sequencing, whole-exome sequencing (WES), and whole-transcriptome sequencing [5]. Another platform sequenced clinical samples, including formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded ones, and showed that this approach is practical and can give some benefits to the patients with lung cancer [6].
The WES approach in Mendelian disorders showed that ~25% of sequencing can give a specific diagnosis based on the germline genetic make-up from the data of 250 probands, mostly consisting of neurological phenotypes in real practice [7].
The clinical application of cancer genomics should be considered in the context of unmet clinical needs to maximize the value of this novel paradigm. Here, we dealt with the potential clinical application of cancer genomics in the aspect of practical management of cancer patients, along with a clinical scenario covering the whole course of cancer management. We overviewed the potential of cancer genomics in the context of real cancer practice through this approach.