To identify somatic mutations of NKTCL, this study used NGS technology, which revealed 25 mutations from 21 genes in five cases. Three genes were classified as the likely actionable group: KMT2D, ARID1A, and TP53. In particular, KMT2D, also known as MLL2, showed the same variant in four cases. Somatic mutations of KMT2D, ARID1A, and TP53 in NKTCL were recurrently reported in recent studies using NGS [202122]. In these studies, KMT2D was one of the most frequently mutated genes, together with STAT3, BCOR, DDX3X, TP53, and ARID1A. These genes were suggested as novel driver genes in the development of NKTCL. We could not identify the mutational status of STAT3, BCOR, or DDX3X, due to the absence of these genes from our cancer panel list.
The KMT2D gene encodes a histone methyltransferase, is classified in the chromatin modification group, and plays an important role in regulating gene transcription. Somatic mutations in the KMT2D gene have been identified in certain cancers [2324]. Most of these mutations result in an abnormally short, nonfunctional histone methyltransferase that cannot perform its role as a tumor suppressor, resulting in the development of cancer. In one of the reports described above, a loss-of-function mutation in KMT2D was identified by RNA sequencing. The result supports the idea that KMT2D may be a tumor suppressor gene in the development of NKTCL and could be a potential therapeutic target. Mutations in this gene were also found in other lymphomas, including relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, mantle cell lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma [252627]. In follicular lymphoma, an integrated genomic analysis identified early driver mutations in the KMT2D gene, together with other chromatin regulator genes.
Mutations in the ARID1A gene have been found in many types of cancers, including ovarian carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, mantle cell lymphoma, and pediatric Burkitt lymphoma [24262829]. We identified a mutation in ARID1A in one out of the five cases. The ARID1A gene encodes a protein that forms one piece (subunit) of several different SWI/SNF protein complexes. SWI/SNF complexes regulate gene activity (expression) by a process known as chromatin remodeling. The mechanism by which mutations in the ARID1A gene contribute to cancer is unknown, although it is thought that changes in SWI/SNF complexes are involved. These changes may disrupt the regulation of genes that help control the growth and division of cells, which lead to cancer [30].
TP53 is a well-known tumor suppressor gene. The encoded protein responds to diverse cellular stresses to regulate the expression of target genes, thereby inducing cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, senescence, DNA repair, or changes in metabolism. We found a mutation in TP53 in one out of the five cases. Mutations in TP53 have been described in NKTCL at various proportions, suggesting some racial, environmental, or lifestyle differences as a possible cause of tumorigenesis, and appear to correlate with more advanced-stage disease [313233]. In other lymphoma studies using NGS, including pediatric Burkitt lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma, mutations in TP53 were also frequently found [2629].
In summary, the likely actionable group, consisting of KMT2D and ARID1A, in addition to TP53, seems to contain frequently mutated tumor suppressor genes in the development of NKTCL, considering their function and the previous literature. It is likely that other genetic changes, in addition to mutations in these genes, are necessary for the development of this disease.
The other genes (unknown significance group) showed a varied functional spectrum. Like the likely actionable group, most of these genes may have a role as tumor suppressors, considering their molecular function: chromatin modification (SETD2 and KAT6B), transcriptional regulator (MBD1, BCL11B, ZNF521, and PER1), regulation of cytokinesis and structural integrity (CDH11, MYH9, and SYNE1), and DNA damage checkpoint (ATR). Additional RNA sequencing could reveal the functional status (gene expression status) of these genes.
In contrast to the genes described above, most of the remaining genes might be related to activating mutations. The majority of these genes is related to transcription factors and signal transduction (ERG, IKBKB, FGFR1, BCR, and MYH11). Other genes are related to angiogenesis (FLT4 and THBS1) and RNA metabolism (SBDS). In particular, ERG (case No. 1), MYH11 (case No. 2), and BCR (case No. 3) showed the highest allele frequency in each case, and BCR was the only gene that showed a missense mutation result in Sanger sequencing. But until now, genetic alterations of these three genes in NKTCL have not been described, and it is difficult to infer their molecular function or impact in NKTCL, considering their known function up to now.
As described above, this study did not complete Sanger sequencing validation due to severe DNA degradation of the FFPE samples. Although Sanger sequencing is still considered the standard technology for the validation of NGS, it has several limitations. It is insensitive to alterations that occur at an allele frequency lower than approximately 20% [34]. In cancer research, histological variables, such as tumor purity, tumor heterogeneity or subclonality, and the ploidy of the tumor cells, within a sample could significantly affect the sensitivity and specificity of DNA sequencing [35]. However, targeted sequencing with very high sequence coverage, like in this study, allows for the detection of lower-abundance (low allele frequency) somatic variants and thus reveals clinically useful information from stromally contaminated or heterogeneous tumor samples [36]. In this study, the allele frequency of the variants ranged from 5.0% to 27.1%, and only three variants showed an allele frequency of over 20%. As a result, Sanger sequencing was not appropriate for the validation of the mutations in this study.
Because this study involved only five cases, it is difficult to define their mutational spectrum. But, the majority of the genes could be grouped as tumor suppressor genes. Previous NKTCL studies have reported some activating mutations [37383940] and deregulated gene expression in various oncogenic pathways [414243]. This study revealed no mutations in oncogenes that have been reported in previous mutation studies or gene expression studies in NKTCL. However, this study result may imply that the mutations of some tumor suppressor genes and genes involved in transcriptional regulation, transcription factors, and signal transduction may have a role as a trigger, resulting in additional oncogenic events in some pathways and oncogenes in the development of NKTCL and disease manifestation. We suggest that these candidate genes may be used as potential bio-markers for this disease in the future. Further studies of transcriptomic alterations and functional analyses could help identify the molecular function, nature, and clinical significance of these candidate genes in NKTCL and could accelerate the attainment of the goal of personalized medicine based on the genetic alterations in each patient.