The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project, launched in 2003 by the US National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), has accelerated the study of various aspects of epigenetics [1], among which DNA methylation has been one of the most actively studied areas [2]. DNA methylation refers to the chemical conversion of a cytosine nucleotide in DNA to 5-methylcytosine by DNA methyltransferase. This phenomenon usually takes place at the genomic region where a cytosine is immediately followed by a guanine and where the dinucleotide is enriched more than expected from the G + C content of the genome. Such CpG islands (CGIs) are typically found in the promoter region of a gene, regulating its expression [3].
Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), including DNA repair genes that repair DNA mismatch during DNA replication, maintain the normal activities of cells, preventing cancer development. On the other hand, their hypermethylation may repress their expression, influencing the development and growth of cancer cells. Moreover, TSG expression may cause gene silencing through the hypermethylation of CGIs, and such a paradigm opens up a new avenue of cancer diagnosis and treatment based on DNA methylation profiles [4].
In cancer cells, genes that play important roles in cell growth and differentiation, such as TSG, DNA repair genes, and apoptosis-related genes, show downregulation in expression due to hypermethylation in their promoter regions. For example, the expression of p16, a well-known TSG, is downregulated due to its promoter hypermethylation [5], and DNA repair genes, such as BRCA1 and hMLH1, are also hypermethylated, repressing their gene expression [6].
It appears that hypermethylation profiles in CGIs may be useful targets for cancer treatment. Some DNA methylation inhibitors have been used as anticancer agents, paving a new avenue for the development of anticancer therapeutics [7]. Gene expression profiles have been used in cancer diagnosis and prognosis, but mRNA levels usually fluctuate temporally or are greatly influenced by environmental cues, resulting in unstable diagnostic sensitivity. On the other hand, DNA hypermethylation can show high specificity and sensitivity in cancer diagnosis [8]. Furthermore, its molecular diagnosis is gaining more and more acceptance due to its availability through real-time and quantitative blood testing [9]. In this study, we surveyed colon cancer data to look for genes that show hypermethylation, and investigated their effects on patient survival.