In the present study, the frequency of CNAs in MM cell lines and patient samples was analyzed and compared according to treatment response and difference in CNAs.
Chromosomal aberrations were least frequent in MM.1S and KMS-12-PE cells among the MM cell lines and most frequent in RPMI8226. The U266 cell line had fewer CNAs, but alterations were observed in almost all chromosomes except one chromosome. These results suggest that CNAs might be related with treatment response. MM.1S is well known as a dexamethasone-sensitive cell line, while RPMI-8226 and U266 have previously been reported to establish resistant cells against several drugs in previous studies [40,41].
To determine whether chromothripsis was induced by drug treatment, two cell lines (KMS-12-BM and KMS-12-PE) derived from the same origin were used for analysis after BTZ treatment. As a result, it was found that the frequency of breakpoints and chromothripsis-like patterns was increased after drug treatment in the resistant group, and the frequency was higher in the q arm, which is relatively longer. On the other hand, no significant difference was observed between pre- and post-treatment in the sensitive group.
In patient BM samples, the frequency of CNAs was high in the resistant group. In addition, when the patients were compared to their BM samples between pre- and post-treatment, the number of breakpoints was decreased in the sensitive group but increased in the resistant group. So, these results suggest that chromothripsis could be associated with therapeutic response. Also, it means that the drug probably could induce chromothripsis, depending on the drug administration in the clinic.
When the chromosomal analysis was performed, the frequency of chromothripsis-like patterns in chr 1 was the highest in resistant patients and MM cell lines. A previous study also reported that the frequency of CNAs was highest in chr 1. Especially, elderly patients aged 65 years or older are more likely to have abnormalities when they are treated with novel therapies [1]. Also, the copy number of the genes in the 1q21 region, which showed the most chromothripsis-like patterns, was amplified in resistant patients. There are more studies that have reported similar findings as our results [32-39, 42, 43]. Chr 4, where the MMSET and FGFR3 genes are located, and chr 14, where the IgH gene is located, showed fewer chromothripsis-like patterns in a previous study [44]. These results mean that drug treatment to patients might be able to affect the structure of a particular chromosome.
The chromothripsis-like pattern has been commonly observed in 1q, 13q, and 16q as compared to the chromothripsis-like pattern confirmed in this study and similar results in other studies [22, 45]. Unlike the result from other studies, chromothripsis-like patterns in 2q, 3q, 10q, 12q, and 17p were not observed in this study. However, unique chromothripsis-like patterns were observed in this study for 6q, 9p, 22q, Xp, and Xq.
The advantage of using an SNP array is that it has a wide detection range of abnormalities by evaluating abnormalities in entire chromosomes with high resolution. However, there is a disadvantage, in that it requires a high quantity of DNA. Therefore, NGS-based CNV, which has relatively low resolution but requires low DNA input, could replace the SNP array. Based on the analysis of our results, NGS-based CNV is not worse than the SNP array and could replace the SNP array test to detect chromothripsis-like patterns.
Although the number of analyzed samples in this pilot study was small, we showed that the chromothripsis-like pattern was associated with the patient treatment response and that the drug treatment might affect the structure of the chromosome. Finally, this study suggests that a chromothripsis-like pattern could be induced by drug treatment in MM patients and that chromothripsis might be a good predictor in the diagnosis of MM patients.