The advent of genomic medicine has bolstered the appreciation of heterogeneity between and, especially, within tumors. This cellular heterogeneity plays a major role in tumor progression and sensitivity to anti-tumor therapies [1, 2], thereby posing a significant challenge to personalized cancer therapy. With continuing advances in high-throughput single-cell sequencing technology [3, 4], we are now able to interrogate at high resolution the genomic features of both the malignant cells and the immune cells residing within the tumor microenvironment [5–7] to better understand what promotes evasion from growth suppression and cell death signals. Given the extremely heterogenous nature of tumors and the equally diverse immune repertoire in a population, single-cell sequencing provides information that bulk sequencing cannot, such as intratumoral heterogeneity [8, 9], clonal evolution [4, 10, 11], tumor microenvironment remodeling status [7, 12], and development of cancer therapy resistance [13]. This information will be invaluable in the effort to predict targetable mechanisms of resistance to cancer immunotherapy, a revolutionary cancer treatment that harnesses the immune system to battle a wide range of tumor types including melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and non-small cell lung cancer [14]. Understanding tumor heterogeneity via single-cell sequencing has implications for the identification of biomarkers for cancer and could help uncover approaches to delay or reverse acquired resistance.
Multi-omics is an umbrella term to describe multi-dimensional analytical methods that integrate high-throughput biomolecule data from multiple sources, such as the genome (via whole genome sequencing), transcriptome (via RNA-Seq), proteome (via liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry), interactome (via genome-wide chromosome conformation capture [Hi-C]), epigenome (via chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing [ChIP-Seq], Bisulfite-Seq, or assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing [ATAC-Seq]), and metabolome (via mass spectrometry [MS]) [15]. Integration of multiple biomolecular datasets is particularly relevant to the investigation of factors driving tumorigenesis and metastasis since malignancy can arise from the concomitant effects of mild perturbations within interlinked homeostatic networks that may individually go unnoticed [16]. With the advent of single-cell sequencing approaches, multi-omics methods can be applied to better understand the complex interactions and connections in cell state and phenotype in the cancer ecosystem and explore cellular heterogeneity that often confounds biomolecular variation from multi-omics approaches in bulk [17].
This review presents the perspectives of single-cell genomic analysis in cancer immunology, the potential pitfalls of different single-cell analysis technology, and the therapeutic opportunity for cancer treatment as the hallmarks of precision medicine in the future.