Until the arrival of NGS technologies in this field in 2006, shotgun libraries had been constructed using circular vectors, each of which had an insert derived from a metagenomic DNA fragment [53]. Sequencing strategies designed either to completely assemble the sequence of each long-insert vector (tens to thousands of kilobases) or to generate a paired-end read from small inserts (around 1-2 kilobases) were applied to those vector libraries. The former strategy has a unique strength, in that it is relatively easy to generate contigs orders of magnitude longer than the read length when assembling the reads from homogeneous templates [2]. However, such a strategy is not scalable to analyze a large number of clones, as the tremendous amount of reads per clone needs to be screened. The latter strategy, a genuine random shotgun approach, took essentially the same approach with the NGS-based metagenome assembly, which enables analysis of a large number of clones but requires high coverage in order to be successful [54, 55]. Regardless of the strategies taken, vector library construction and subsequent sequencing are time-consuming and cost-ineffective, and only a few organizations can lead such efforts.
NGS technologies have proven their utility in shotgun metagenomics since their earliest application appeared in 2006 with studies using 454 pyrosequencing data. After all, technologies like 454 and Illumina sequencing have become routinely applied for shotgun metagenomics, accompanying changes in the trends of the field as well as the properties of the data themselves. As sequencing cost continues to decrease, more researchers outside the big sequencing centers have started to participate in metagenomic studies, resulting in higher individuality and diversity of metagenome data. Bioinformatics for metagenome analysis has progressed, along with the explosion of data, both by extension from the tools and databases previously developed in genomics and the adoption of methodologies used by ecologists. Less than a decade has passed since metagenomic shotgun sequencing took its place as general practice for biologists, and it is fair to say that bioinformatics for shotgun metagenomics is at a premature stage. In this section, we aim to summarize the methods that seem to be the 'current' standard, the most widely used, in the analysis of shotgun metagenomic data (Fig. 1).