Molecular bar-code arrays enable the systematic identification of genes required for growth in any condition of interest [2]. These arrays are best known for their use with collections of yeast gene deletions, each of which is tagged with a 20-mer identifying DNA sequence known as a molecular bar-code. However, their extensive usage has been hampered by inevitable defects, such as intensity bias and bar-code mutations [15,16]. In a previous study [16], we reported that 16.6% of bar-codes contained mutations, as judged by a Sanger sequencing analysis of bar-codes. In the study, we optimized the hybridization processes of the array in order to reduce the inevitable defects originating from dozens of rounds of each hybridization step.
The universal primer pairs to amplify molecular tags were theoretically designed as 20-mer oligonucleotides. However, during the optimization process, it was elucidated that their actual lengths were a 20-mer/19-mer and a 17-mer/18-mer for U1/U2 and D1/D2, respectively. Furthermore, the annealing temperature was empirically obtained to obtain maximum yield with fewer noisy bands. In response to technological advances in microarrays, the second version of the GeneChip array was improved to show better performance without a change in feature size (11 µm) despite a twofold reduction in feature capacity from 100K to 48K. For example, the second version did not have separate sectors and mismatched probes, with fewer negative and positive controls. In contrast, the second version of the array in budding yeast [8] reduced the feature size from 24 µm to 8 µm, while retaining 100K features, but using a similar strategy to ours for probe allocation.
Compared with the optimization process of budding yeast arrays [8,10], a couple of optimization steps in fission yeast arrays are peculiar. Regarding blocking oligonucleotides, an intriguing observation was made that the concentration required for up-tags was three-fold higher than that required for down-tags. This unexpected phenomenon would make sense under the assumption that the PCR yield of up-tags would be higher than that of down-tags. When the DNA sequences of PCR primers were carefully checked, the universal primer D2 for down-tag PCR contained a “G” stretch, with six “G’s” straight in a row. This “G” stretch could result in a lower yield for down-tag PCR than for up-tag PCR. It was a mistake that we did not carefully check for “G” stretches inside the PCR primers. Next, a recessive ts-mutation unrelated to the gene deletion was contained in a subset of our deletion collection, which required an extra step to optimize the culture temperature.
Overall, 95% of the tags (4,316/4,526) in the deletion library were represented at least once among the up-tags and/or down-tags. At first glance, a 95% success rate appears good, but there might exist ~250 false-positive tags supposing a 5% detection error among ~5,000 deletions in fission yeast. To circumvent this problem that arises from both yeast collections, the problematic bar-code probes were corrected in the second version of the array as referred to earlier, as far as sequence data of the tags were available. However, the array technology still requires an upgrade to completely eliminate potential defects, which promises to make the fission yeast gene deletion library a reliable tool for understanding molecular gene function in a systematic way. In this regard, a platform based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis would be innovative and would avoid potential errors, because each bar-code could be counted by direct sequencing irrespective of the inevitable defects caused by array hybridization. The results of this study serve as a basis for an innovative upgrade of the present microarray technology to a future NGS technology.