DNA methylation and cancer
One of the best studied epigenetic signals is DNA methylation. In contrast to a dazzling variety of histone modifications, DNA methylation is a simple covalent chemical modification, resulting in the attachment of a methyl (CH3) group at the 5' carbon position of the cytosine ring. When methyl groups are attached to the DNA in genes, transcription of these genes is usually turned off, and then these genes are silenced. When a cell divides, its DNA is copied via replication and divided equally into two daughter cells during mitosis. During this process, the pattern of DNA methylation can also be copied onto the new daughter DNA, allowing the information that determines whether a gene is "on" or "off" to be inherited to the two daughter cells [15].
DNA methylation in mammals occurs mostly at CpG dinucleotides, and methylation of CpG islands explains a stable gene silencing mechanism [15]. In normal somatic cells, most (over 50%) CpG islands are unmethylated. DNA methylation is important for the regulation of non-CpG islands, CpG island promoters, and repetitive sequences to maintain genome stability [15, 16]. Furthermore, DNA methylation plays important roles in X chromosome inactivation, imprinting, embryonic development, silencing of repetitive elements and germ cell-specific genes, differentiation, and maintenance of pluripotency [16-18]. DNA methylation is controlled by a family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) that catalyze the transfer of methyl groups from S-adenosyl-L-methionine to the 5' position of cytosine bases in the CpG dinucleotide. Methyl-binding domain (MBD) proteins, such as MeCP2, MBD1, MBD2, and MBD4, bind to methylated CpG sites and are involved in transcriptional repression [19].
In cancer, hypomethylation usually occurs at repeated DNA sequences, such as long interspersed nuclear elements, whereas hypermethylation predominantly involves CpG islands [20]. DNA hypermethylation has been shown to result in abnormal silencing of several tumor suppressor genes in most types of cancer [21]. Thus, DNA methylation is grossly reduced, but DNA hypermethylation is specifically and locally augmented at CpG islands at tumor suppressor genes (Table 1); yet, its involvement and role in tumorigenesis remain controversial. Yet, experimental progress has added an emerging epigenetic aberration, "aberrant DNA methylation," to an established cancer hallmark, "genomic instability." DNA hypermethylation at tumor suppressors or genes having tumor suppressive functions is more frequent than their mutations in cancer cells. Hundreds to thousands of genes are hypermethylated in cancer cells, while only tens of genes are mutated. Epigenetic silencing via DNA methylation results in gene inactivation and promotes carcinogenesis, indicating that DNA methylation impinges on carcinogenesis.