Although ATC is known to be one of the most aggressive tumor types, there has been little progress in the diagnosis and treatment, largely due to the shortage of genetic information associated with the molecular mechanism of ATC tumorigenesis. In this review, we discussed genetic alterations, structural variations, and epigenetic changes of ATC performed by many scientists to date. As shown, only limited information is available, and few studies were performed using genome-based approaches. Generally, the quantities and qualities of samples for genomic study are very high, so that it is not easy to fulfill the requirements. Therefore, collecting a sufficient number of samples for ATC matching these criteria is a kind of challenge for many scientists. However, current next-generation sequencing techniques require smaller amounts of samples and are applicable for less-qualified samples but provide more accurate results for researchers to evaluate diverse genetic alterations.
Recently, the technical advances of genome study developed explosively so that it could provide more comprehensive information on cancer genomics, especially for gene expression, sequence variations, copy number changes, and epigenetic changes [62]. Using such technology such as next generation sequencing and big data, rapid progress has been realized in many parts of cancer molecular biology, which in turn contributes to the development of early diagnosis tools and/or targeted molecular therapies. Thus, less-detailed cancer types have been intensively targeted by current genomic studies. For example, many studies have analyzed the genomic alterations associated with lung cancer and reported detailed molecular events that could be used directly in the clinic, such as selection of the most effective drug for each patient. For thyroid cancer, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has deposited the analysis results of -500 thyroid cancer genomes in their public website, which may be published very soon. These analyses will provide a more detailed, multidimensional genomic characterization of thyroid cancer genomes. However, most of the 500 thyroid cancer genomes in TCGA were only from PTC patients, and none was from an ATC patient.
It is clear that genomic study of ATC is urgently needed so that the molecular mechanisms of ATC and the genetic and epigenetic changes in ATC could be more preciously understand. Studies on ATC-associated genetic alterations, such as mutations and aberrant structural and epigenetic changes, based on genomic approaches should help to elucidate the molecular consequences of the activation of oncogenes and the loss of tumor suppressors to improve our understanding of tumor biology in ATC. Especially, using recently developmed NGS technology, we will get a deep understanding of ATC-specific molecular mechanisms for successful diagnosis and treatment of this aggressive cancerand further facilitate the search for prognostic and predictive markers and new therapeutic targets for personalized medicine.