Disease gene prioritization
Disease-gene association studies have focused on identifying relationships between disease phenotypes and genes to reveal and understand human disease mechanisms. Although traditional approaches, including linkage analysis and association studies, have been successful, the specified genomic intervals often contain tens or even hundreds of genes. It may not be possible by experiments to identify the correct causative genes of all the genes that lie on the specified intervals. To reduce experimental costs and efforts, the prioritization of candidate genes becomes one of the major tasks in disease-gene association studies.
Taking into consideration that genes corresponding to similar disease phenotypes tend to be neighbors in either a PPI network [88, 89] or a pathway [90], several network-based disease gene prioritization methods have been proposed recently. The network-based disease gene prioritization methods [91-94] define different similarity scores between the disease and genes, based on either functional annotations or PPI networks, to rank candidate genes. The random walk method [91] considers the random walk on graphs and uses a diffusion kernel matrix [87] derived from a PPI network as the steady-state transition probability matrix. The random walk method then defines the similarity score as the sum of elements of the diffusion kernel corresponding to known disease genes for each candidate gene. CIPHER [92] adopts a regression model for similarities between phenotypes and considers the Gaussian kernel for closeness between genes. The Pearson correlation coefficient between the similarity of phenotypes and the closeness between genes is used as a similarity score. On the other hand, PRINCE [93] and MINProp [94] are based on the iterative label propagation algorithm [95]. PRINCE defines the prioritization function, which combines functional similarities from the network information with prior information for disease phenotypes as the similarity score. The prioritization function is obtained by iteratively applying a label propagation algorithm. MINProp first defines two heterogeneous networks, such as a gene network and a disease network, and then additionally defines bipartite networks between two heterogeneous networks from known disease-gene associations. After initializing the labels of the disease genes, MINProp iteratively propagates label information through three networks until convergence occurs. Finally, the converged label scores are used as the similarity scores. From the comparison study in [93, 94], PRINCE and MINProp outperform the random walk and CIPHER methods, respectively. There is no comparison study between PRINCE and MINProp, but MINProp is more general than PRINCE, since MINProp can be applied to three or more heterogeneous networks. We report these disease gene prioritization methods with their data resources in Table 4 [12, 13, 15-18, 91-94, 96-99].