3D chromatin architecture
The array of nucleosomes organized in 30-nm fibers, called chromatin, has diverse functions well beyond mere compaction. Coordinated activity of distal elements is orchestrated by short- and long-range DNA interactions, which is determined by the 3D chromatin structure as well as the local environment of individual genes. For instance, chromatin conformation/looping mediates a promoter's access to its enhancers, thereby determining the transcriptional fate of a gene [49]. Spatial proximity can be determined by measuring the interaction frequencies of linearly distal fragments by a suite of chromosome conformation capture (3C)-based assays.
Chromosomes assume a specific tertiary structure with profound implications for cellular function and fate [49]. While the overall chromatin structure cannot be directly measured, measuring spatial distances between pairs of genomic loci has become increasingly more efficient with the arrival of 3C technologies [28]. Treatment with formaldehyde crosslinks spatially proximal DNA loci in cells, and then post-digestion, the resulting fragments are allowed to ligate in a weak solution (cross-linked fragments ligate with higher frequency than random fragments). This frequency is quantitatively assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Known loci are selected for by using sequence-specific probes that allow assaying specific pairs of regions in so-called one-versus-one mapping. Circular chromosome conformation capture, or 4C, allows whole-genome mapping of all spatial interactions of one specific region of interest (one-vs-all mapping) [29]. Chromosome conformation capture carbon copy, or 5C, deploys several anchors and primers to ensure targeting of several regions at once to attain higher coverage (many-vs-many) [30]. Finally, the most recent derivative of 3C, namely Hi-C, permits surveying of the whole genome [31] in a relatively unbiased fashion for frequencies of spatially interacting pairs of loci in the entire genome without restricting the exploration to selected loci. This was done with reasonably high resolution, where the human genome was partitioned into 100-kb blocks and the spatial interaction between every pair of intra-chromosomal regions was assessed, while interchromosomal interactions have been mapped at 1-Mb resolution [31].
A variation of Hi-C, called chromatin interaction analysis by paired-end tag sequencing (ChIA-PET), involves a ChIP reaction to isolate chromatin interactions involving regions of DNA that bind to a protein of interest [32]. For example, an antibody targeting RNA polymerase II can be used to precipitate interactions involving a promoter and another interacting region, such as a distal enhancer or other promoters [50].