Analysis
Construction of multi-class phenotype
Among the procedures to measure blood glucose levels, fasting and the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) are commonly conducted [1112]. Standard time intervals between the intake and measurement are 1 h and 2 h, denoted as OGTT-1h and OGTT-2h [7]. Diagnostic criteria are recommended as a combination of the measurements [6]. Listed in Table 1, the diagnosis is determined by considering fasting and OGTT-2h simultaneously [7]. Each of them was categorized into 3 distinct ranges, resulting in 9 composite ranges, which gave the criteria for the 4 diagnostic categories. Genomic data from the Korean Association Resource (KARE) project [13] were analyzed with the phenotypes of fasting and OGTT-2h and -1h. With the number of valid samples (n = 8371), the proportions that fell into each of the 9 composite categories are shown in the fourth column of Table 1. Note that neither of fasting and OGTT-2h can determine the diagnostic result independently of each other. An additional diagnostic criterion may be given by OGTT-1h [7]. The last column of Table 1 shows the percentage of the samples that were found to be normal in OGTT-1h within each of the 9 composite categories. A need for additional categorization seems to be apparent, because most of the percentages are away from 0% or 100%. To make such a multi-class phenotype, 3 of the individual KARE phenotypes—fasting, OGTT-2h, and OGTT-1h—were first categorized into 3 classes for the first 2 phenotypes and into 2 classes for the third one, following the reference criteria [67]. A single composite phenotype of 3×3×2 classes was constructed as such. The resulting 18-class composite phenotype was analysed with the genotype part using GIDS to identify the most associated single- and two-locus models.
Single- and two-locus models
All of the available 327,872 SNPs in the KARE dataset were thoroughly examined for the association with the multi-class phenotype constructed above. Ranked by the sGIDS, the top 50 SNPs are plotted in Fig. 2, representing the main effects. Prominent SNPs may be seen in groups of 2, 2, and 4 showing the strongest association strengths. Those SNPs are listed in Table 2 with detailed information.
Using the calculations for the single-locus model, 1,000 SNPs were selected by sorting them with their respective GIDS values. Then, all of the possible pairs of those candidate SNPs were examined for their association strengths by evaluating sGIDS. The 50 most strongly associated pairs are plotted in Fig. 3, 5 of which are identified with their rs numbers.