Molecular dynamic simulations of the rpoB-RIF complex
The docking complexes of RIF with wild and mutant (S450L) rpoB were subjected to molecular dynamic (MD) simulation using the GROMACS 4.6.3 [26] simulation packages, employing the gromos54A7 all-atom force field, as this particular mutant has more impact on drug resistance than H445Y. The protein was protonated at default pH, and the ligand topology was generated by the PRODRG server [27]. Then, the complexes were solvated by explicit SPC/E (extended simple point charge) water model [28] in cubic boxes with a minimum edge distance of 7 Å from the box. Both systems were neutralized electrically by adding 0.10 mM NaCl. Both systems had been relaxed through steepest descent energy minimization, followed by temperature (NVT-constant number of particles, volume and temperature) and pressure (NPT-constant number of particles, pressure and temperature) equilibrium for 100 ps each. The NVT was performed at 300 K with position restraints applied to all of the backbone atoms, and during NPT, all of these restraints were removed. All bond lengths were constrained using the linear constraint solver (LINCS) algorithm [29]. For the temperature and pressure coupling, the velocity rescale thermostat [30] and isotropic Parrinello-Rahman barostat [31] were applied, respectively. For the calculation of long-range electrostatic interactions, Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) was used with a fourth-order spline interpolation and 0.15-nm Fourier grid spacing [32]. The short-range non-bonded van der Waals and Coulombic interactions were considered between particles within 12 Å of cutoff distance. During the production run, all of these protocols were followed along with the temperature coupling at 323 K using the velocity rescale thermostat with a coupling time constant of (τT) of 0.8 ps and pressure coupling by the Parrinello-Rahman barostat at 1 bar, via a coupling constant of τP = 2 ps with compressibility at 0.000045/bar. Snapshots of the trajectory were taken every 2 ps, and the Microsoft Excel program was used for preparation of the graph.