Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many genetic variations influencing complex traits. However, the variants identified to date only explain a portion of heritability, possibly because there remain many unidentified variants with small effects [1,2]. To detect associations with small genetic effects, large study cohorts are required to obtain sufficient statistical power [3]. Therefore, there have been ongoing efforts to increase the size of study cohorts. One possible way to increase the sample size is to utilize publicly available cohorts. Publicly available control datasets can be particularly useful, because they can be used as controls for many different diseases.
One of the popular publicly available datasets is the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) dataset [4]. The WTCCC study aimed to identify associations of genetic variations with seven diseases across the genome. The dataset consists of the genotype data of ~2,000 cases of each of the seven diseases and a common control set of ~3,000 individuals. The controls came from two sources: ~1,500 individuals from the 1958 British Birth Cohort (58C) and ~1,500 individuals selected from blood donors recruited as part of the WTCCC project (UK Blood Services [UKBS] controls). The WTCCC performed tests to check differences in the allele frequencies of genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the 58C and UKBS groups. The results indicated that there were no significant differences between the two control groups despite subtle dissimilarities in the population groups sampled, DNA processing techniques, and age.
More recently, the analysis of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes has become widespread owing to the development of HLA imputation technology [5-7]. The HLA complex, which encodes the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and is located on chromosome 6 (Chr. 6p21.1-6p21.3), is the most polymorphic and genetically variable region in the human genome. HLA comprises two main groups; class I antigens (HLA-A, -B, and -C) and class II antigens (HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP) which form key determinants of histocompatibility. Large-scale HLA association analyses were previously difficult due to the high cost of HLA typing, but have recently become more commonly feasible through the help of HLA imputation, which can predict HLA information from SNP data without HLA typing [6,8]. HLA association analysis is similar to other association analyses in that a large sample size is critical for the successful mapping of variants. Thus, the use of publicly available datasets such as the WTCCC control dataset can also be helpful in HLA analysis.
Here, we extend the between-control homogeneity analysis of the WTCCC study to HLA. Our goal was to systematically examine potential differences in HLA between the 58C and UKBS controls in the WTCCC dataset. Although the WTCCC project reported that there were only few differences in the genome-wide SNP frequencies between the two control groups, the difference in HLA region has not been examined before. If the difference in HLA is negligible between the two control groups, this might suggest that these combined controls can be used as additional controls for HLA fine-mapping association studies. For this purpose, we imputed HLA information for the two control datasets using recently developed HLA imputation technology [5] with a large European reference panel [9]. The imputation yielded information on HLA alleles, amino acid residues, and intragenic SNPs in binary markers. Then, we tested the significance of differences in these markers between the control datasets.