LAPPS Grid ↔ INCEpTION
The WSEV defines an ontology of annotation types and their attributes that may be referenced from within LIF annotation documents via unique URIs. Objects produced and consumed by NLP components in LAPPS Grid pipelines are mapped to corresponding terms in the WSEV, which enables ensuring that a given component can use the annotations produced by a previous component. To maximize generality across NLP components, the WSEV is designed so that only higher-level linguistic annotation objects upon which there is considerable consensus in practice (e.g., "Token", "Sentence", "Constituent", "NamedEntity", etc.) are explicitly specified, thereby accommodating the annotation objects produced and consumed by most NLP tools. More specific identifiers, such as part of speech tags, constituent labels, and entity types, are not prescribed, but reference to a defined list used in a given annotation can (should) be given in the metadata for the view in which the annotation lives. The LIF format also allows adding any number of user-specified feature-value pairs to an annotation, as required for a given application; these may be used or ignored by subsequent tools in the pipeline, as appropriate.
While in principle, a user can define custom annotation types in INCEpTION, there is a set of built-in types that conform to the DKPro Core type system. While DKPro Core and the WSEV differ in details, there is generally significant overlap between the annotation types they cover. Therefore, in order to make productive use of LAPPS Grid services, it is necessary to perform a format conversion as well as a mapping of INCEpTION annotation types to types defined in the WSEV. This means that custom annotation types defined in INCEpTION may not be readily usable by LAPPS Grid services. On the INCEpTION side, there is presently no concept of grouping annotations by provenance. Thus, when ingesting LAPPS Grid data to INCEpTION, the information encoded in the LIF views identifying the producer (software that produced the annotations) is currently dropped; to enable round-tripping between the LAPPS Grid and INCEpTION, some means to preserve this information in the INCEpTION representation must be implemented. Similarly, INCEpTION does not allow multiple annotations of the same type, and so only the latest LIF view containing a particular annotation type is included. Again, means to represent the information from multiple LIF views involving the same annotation type in INCEpTION would demand creating a special mechanism to accommodate this information, if a round trip between the two platforms is desired.