Despite these encouraging cases, there are wide gaps between the diagnosis and treatment of ultra-rare diseases. Targeted and tailored therapies for ultra-rare diseases are usually hard, mainly because of scarce treatment options. To fill these gaps, several conditions should be fulfilled. First, the cost of NGS should decrease further. As of this writing, the cost of WES has fallen to under USD $1,000, which is still a formidable price for a routine application in clinics, while the usage of WGS may still be impractical. Second, the sensitivity and specificity of genetic diagnostics should be improved. Current commercially available exome capture kits covers ~99% of the RefSeq exome, and over 95% of the targeted bases are covered at least eight times with a typical WES run [24], implying that we are achieving fair exome coverage technically. However, the positive diagnostic rate of clinical WES for Mendelian phenotypes remains ~30% [25], suggesting that a substantial portion of the remainder (~70%) might be caused by variants located outside of exons or are not detectable by WES. Although the majority of functionally critical and disease-causing mutations occurs in protein-coding regions, the vast majority of the genome is non-coding and may contain variants with functional significance that has been neglected. Third, processes of NGS data generation should be more simplified. Currently, the typical NGS pipeline consists of library preparation, sequencing, and multiple analysis steps, including read alignments, variant calling, and annotation. For NGS to pervade in clinical practice, the processes from DNA samples to the final results should be more concise. In this context, nanopore sequencing techniques, such as MinION, could function as a good alternative to current NGS technologies if they improve the high error rates and relatively small-scale data output [26]. Fourth, more treatment options, such as targeted drugs and gene therapy strategies, should be provided. The metastatic rhabdoid meningioma with a BRAF mutation and CTLA-4 cases mentioned above are rather exceptional cases, since the genetic alterations were already targeted through commercially available drugs. Nevertheless, the CTLA-4 case is a good example of drug repositioning, which can be an efficient option to accelerate treatments for ultra-rare diseases, given its shorter development time and lower cost [27].