The next step following chimera detection is OTU clustering, which is an essential process in community analysis, as it sorts sequences with the closest matches and then gives a taxonomic meaning to the clustered group. Sequencing errors, chimeras, and clustering algorithms have great influence on the quality of OTUs [33]. There are generally two ways that have been suggested for generating OTUs. One is alignment-based clustering, and the other is the alignment-free clustering method. Sequence alignment is done by either aligning query sequences against pre-aligned reference sequences [34] or using pairwise and multiple sequence alignments [35]. It is known that alignment quality has a significant impact on OTU clustering results [36]. Alignment quality varies, depending on gene loci and the parameters used, but sequence alignment incorporating secondary structure information generally improves OTU assignment, at least for 16S rRNA gene sequences [37]. The nearest alignment space termination (NAST) algorithm [34] has been used successfully in microbial ecology as a profile-based alignment tool, and SINA aligner [38], based on partial order alignment, and infernal [39], using consensus RNA secondary structure profiles, were recently introduced. However, there is currently no method or algorithm that does automatic alignment almost perfectly or up to the quality that can be achieved manually. Alternatively, alignment-free methods are more broadly used in picking OTUs. Commonly used alignment-free tools are UCLUST [18], CD-HIT [19], and ESPRIT-Tree [20]. UCLUST and CD-HIT implemented their own sorting processes in OTU clustering by sorting sequences in order of decreasing abundance (i.e., UCLUST) or decreasing length (i.e., CD-HIT), and ESPRIT-Tree uses an average linkage-based hierarchical clustering algorithm. There are some other tools that implement a 'homopolymer collapse option' for minimizing homopolymer errors in 454 reads: CLOTU [40], SCATA (http://scata.mykopat.slu.se), CrunchCluster [41], and TBC [21]. However, these tools are currently applicable only to 454 reads, and there is a fundamental limitation of not being able to detect 'real' sequence differences appearing in homopolymer regions. SCATA has suggested another OTU picking approach by using both reference sequences and query sequences together in the clustering process, and then the OTU is assigned to a taxonomic identity of the reference sequence if the reference sequence belongs to the cluster.
A taxonomy-dependent approach was recently proposed as an alternative to OTU clustering approaches [42]. This method has two major advantages over OTU clustering. First, direct taxonomic assignment to each query sequence is more tolerant to sequencing errors than the OTU picking process, as the assignment process is less affected by mismatches or insertion/deletion errors, while sequencing errors are known to generate many spurious OTUs. It also helps prevent a massive loss of erroneous but still taxonomically meaningful sequences. Second, it enables researchers to perform a more standardized community analysis, based on a single assignment rule. There is no truly 'universal' primer set, and the difference in primer sets makes it difficult to compare datasets, as the different primer sets amplify differing variable regions within 16S rRNA genes and catch only a partial body of the whole 'true' community. On the other hand, a taxonomy-supervised method can circumvent the problem by directly assigning sequences to the closest relatives using full-length reference sequences. This approach also facilitates cross-comparison and meta-analysis across versatile microbial community studies. A caveat is the low taxa coverage of current marker gene databases, which offsets the advantage of this approach and hinders the application in practice by failing to find the closest matches to known members, due primarily to its lack of close relatives in a given database. Another limitation is the relatively lower assignment accuracy and precision of short NGS reads compared to those of full-length sequences. It is generally known that even longer 454 Titanium reads are able to be identifiable with high confidence scores at best to the genus level [43], even genus-level classification is doubted [44]. However, this problem will be soon overcome as more high-quality sequences are added to the databases. For example, EzTaxon-e benefits from using artificially defined species names, which are defined based on combinatorial evaluation using both phylogeny and pairwise similarity between unclassified sequences on all taxonomic levels. It endows taxonomically more meaningful information to those 'unclassified' sequences rather than remaining unknown or environmental sequences. Moreover, recent updates have slightly improved the database coverage by adding error-free 454 reads that are selected using abundance information (http://eztaxon-e.ezbiocloud.net/).