Patient-to-patient visual analysis
From the overview of all patients, users can select one or more patients as well as groups of patients to analyze further. At first glance, the analytical view provides full information of both genomic and biological data. The layout of the panels is as follows: 1) the top-left panel displays information of the Affymetrix expression microarrays, 2) the top-right panel displays information of the Illumina SNPs, and 3) the middle table displays all background information of the patients, and the bottom table displays the treatment details (see Fig. 7). Each probe set in the gene is represented as a point on the x-y coordinate system. All genes are distributed orderly from top to bottom along the y-coordinate while their values are represented horizontally at the x-coordinate. This visual projection follows the biological rule-the order in which genes are displayed is sorted according to chromosomal order. A quick sort process is performed in prior to the visualization. By providing an overview of the entire genetic and biomedical information, the analysts can identify patterns and abnormalities before exploring further.
Fig. 7 shows an example of the analytical window of the genetic and clinical data corresponding to patient ALL323. We can see that the Affymetrix expression microarray values of this person vary from -2 to 4, in which the majority of the genes' values are [-1, 0]. It is interesting to see that there is a region of loss of heterozygosity in ALL323 (highlighted by the red dash-line rectangle).
Following our revised model of the visual analytics process, the analytical exploration is an essential process to discover insight and knowledge. We provide a variety of functions to support the visual exploration and analysis, including highlighting the importance or difference, zooming, filtering, detailing on demand, and comparing multiple patients or groups of patients. A user can interactively highlight GOI and significantly different genes as well as deemphasize the others. This feature allows one to gain a better view of those GOI in comparison with the entire gene structure. The user can also select the option of displaying those GOI only. A semantic zooming technique is applied to zoom in (or zoom out) on any particular area of focus (see Fig. 8), which allows the analyst to explore and view in detail the genetic information. The level of details is updated dynamically depending on the amount of focused genes and the size of the windows. This property ensures the best fit of information on the available space. In addition, detailed information of a particular gene is shown when the mouse is over the gene (see Fig. 8E and 8F).
Fig. 8 shows an example of the visualization of patient ALL323 (same as Fig. 7) when various options and navigations are applied. In particular, the figure presents the views when a) the GOI are emphasized from the structure, b) the view shows the GOI only, c) the significantly different genes are highlighted, d) the significantly different genes are highlighted within the GOI, e) zoom in is applied to SNP data (at the right panel), and f) the user zooms in on the gene expression data (at the left panel) so that the detailed information of probe sets in the genes is displayed.
We also provide a mechanism to compare multiple patients by aligning the analytical windows together. This figure is particularly helpful for identifying the similarities, differences, regularities, and irregularities of the patients. Fig. 9 presents the view of genetic and clinical information of the 3 chosen patients (highlighted in Fig. 4). First, the complete data of each patient can be directly compared. By way of example, the figure indicates a significant difference of patient ALL323 when compared to the other two patients ALL48 and ALL134-in particular, a region of loss of heterozygosity in ALL323, a region that may contain the genetic differences with ALL134 and ALL48, which may explain the differences in treatment outcome despite being considered similar according to the clinical presentation. We now describe the technical details for visualization of the complete set of SNPs and probe sets for the genes represented by the 250 developed features.