Non-small-cell lung cancer is an increasingly common and lethal disease, accounting for 25% of all cancer deaths. Sequencing of the lung cancer genome is of particular interest for identifying driver mutations and their pathways involved in cancer growth and development [1]. Somatic mutational profiles are crucial for cancer diagnosis and classification, which lead to tailoring the best therapeutic strategy to individual patients [2].
Previous studies using the Sanger sequencing method have identified several key mutations associated with lung cancer. Massive PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing of 623 candidate cancer genes in 188 lung adenocarcinomas discovered 26 mutational target genes [3]. Although the study provided highly valuable results, it is very time-consuming and costly-so much so that a single laboratory can hardly perform this kind of large-scale sequencing projects.
A mass spectrometric-based mutation detection technology, named OncoMap, has been effective in identifying somatic mutations in cancer genomes [4]. Currently, it can detect more than 1,000 mutations in 112 commonly mutated genes that were previously identified as oncogenes and tumor suppressors [5]. Although OncoMap is a high-throughput method for mutational profiling with both fresh frozen and paraffin-embedded tissue samples, the mutation detection is limited to previously identified mutations, and it cannot discover novel mutations.
Recent advancements of next-generation sequencing technology have made breakthroughs in identifying unknown somatic mutations [6]. Combined with sequencing technology, targeted enrichment techniques have been developed to reduce sequencing cost and time [7]. Several recent studies have reported targeted resequencing of cancer samples using next-generation sequencing technologies [8, 9].
Here, we present a fast and cost-effective method to identify somatic mutations in lung cancer. We surveyed the literature and chose 30 mutational target genes that were associated strongly with lung adenocarcinoma development. Target gene capture was performed using selector probes, which involved circularization and amplification of specific restriction fragments covering the target genes using rolling circle amplification [10]. The captured target DNAs were analyzed by next-generation sequencing to find somatic variations. This method could be useful to detect previously known recurrent mutations as well as novel variations.