The famous case of Nick Volker exemplifies the beneficial effect of NGS techniques on patients with atypical and undiagnosed disorders [17]. The cause of his fatal bowel inflammation and colocutaneous fistula turned out to be a mutation in the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) gene by WES, which has important roles in inflammatory signaling and immunity. His disease was almost cured by cord blood transplantation. Following this, a few more cases of precision medicine supported by NGS have been reported. WGS of 14-year-old twins with dopa (3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine)-responsive dystonia revealed compound heterozygous mutations in the sepiapterin reductase (SPR) gene, encoding sepiapterin reductase. Disruption of the enzyme caused a decrease in the neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin, and administration of L-dopa with 5-hydroxytryptophan, a serotonin precursor, led to clinical improvements in both twins [18]. Another case was a cancer: the serine/threonine protein kinase B-raf (BRAF) V600E mutation in metastatic rhabdoid meningioma was found by targeted NGS in a 6-year-old girl [19]. She was successfully treated with dabrafenib, a BRAF inhibitor.
Most recently, a more dramatic case was of a 14-year-old girl who had suffered from autoimmune enteropathy since she was 3 months old [6]. A novel de novo mutation in the ligand binding domain of cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) was discovered by WES (Fig. 2) [62021]. The mutation was presumed to be causative after several in vitro immunological experiments. Abatacept, an FDA-approved fusion protein of the extracellular domain of CTLA-4 and the Fc region of immunoglobulin for rheumatoid arthritis, was administered to the patient and restored regulatory T cell function. Clinically, treatment with abatacept without the need for other immunosuppressants reduced diarrhea output by about 67% (from 3 L/day to 1 L/day). Markedly, blood transfusion was not necessary anymore, allowing the patient to be discharged from a 3-year-long hospitalization, merely needing partial parenteral nutrition.