Taxonomic assignment is a principal component of microbial community analysis; so, the choice of 16S database is also significant, because it may affect post-analysis and interpretation of the community composition. In this study, our goal was to evaluate the bacterial reference databases with a mock community. Here, we analyzed the accuracy of three public databases in terms of how well the correct taxa were found and how well in-sample diversity was reproduced at the OTU level. Our findings showed that EzBioCloud was the most accurate reference database for taxonomic identification, from all tests. It performed better than the other databases, finding more true positive taxa at both the genus and species levels. Greengenes predicted fewer genera than the actual number of genera, and the Silva database, although it roughly predicted the correct number of genera, resulted in many false-positives. This was mainly due to the fact that each database has a different number of sequences; Silva contains 190,000 sequences, and Greengenes contains 99,000 sequences, whereas EzBioCloud contains only 63,000 sequences [1–3]. More sequences in a given database increases the probability of genera being identified as a different genus. Another reason for the poor result in Greengenes is that the database has not been updated since 2013, meaning that it does not contain many of the novel bacterial sequences that have become known since then. As expected, the species-level prediction yield was poor overall compared with that of the genus level, with significantly worse results when Silva and Greengenes were used. This was likely due to the fact that Greengenes and Silva contain sequences that have missing taxonomic information at the species level. In some cases, Silva has only strain information without knowing the species. This demonstrates that the microbial composition from Silva or Greengenes at the species level is spurious, and reidentification is necessary using the representative sequences of the OTUs to figure out the species-level community structure.
When estimating richness and evenness with alpha diversity, EzBioCloud performed well, whereas the other two overestimated the sample richness and underestimated the evenness. Since the data were produced from uniformly distributed bacterial strains, correct estimations were indicated by a value of richness closer to 60 and a higher Simpson’s evenness. The values of EzBioCloud were more biologically reasonable than those of the others. This is, again, because the OTU-level resolution was affected by the number of sequences that each database had. Given the sequence errors generated from the Illumina platform, it is likely that several base differences will assign sequences derived from one species into different OTUs. This also led to an increase in Simpson’s evenness index in EzBioCloud, unlike other databases. This means that even if the database has more sequences, it can create more biases if the taxonomy is not properly organized. Interestingly, our analysis also shows that clustering methods affect indices more than the database itself. Closed reference methods resulted in the worst outcome, giving the highest variation in the same database. Therefore, clustering methods should be chosen carefully when describing in-sample diversity in metagenome studies.
The reader should bear in mind that our findings above were generated using a mock community. Most microbiome communities are composed of more than thousands of species, and their constitution is not uniform like artificial data. Despite these limitations, these results help us to understand the difference between database characteristics and provide a basic guideline in selecting the database, depending on the research purpose.