The main purpose of a GWAS is to detect genetic variants represented by a single SNP or a set of SNPs that are associated with common complex polygenic traits of interest [2, 4, 5, 16, 17]. However, it is commonly known that multiple genetic factors as well as several environmental factors and their interactions are involved in causing complex diseases. Thus, the single SNP approach is not appropriate for detecting multiple genetic factors for common complex polygenic traits. Recently, many researchers have tried GxG interaction analysis in GWASs. However, they focused on rather restricted regions with a small number of SNPs due to computational complexity [32, 33].
In this paper, we have successfully performed two-way GxG interaction analysis of 8,838 individuals with the selected 101,837 SNPs, which cover most genomic regions. It became possible with the help of a GPU-based system with three GPU graphic cards. It took only 19 h to perform 51,853,363,660 possible two-way interaction analyses with 10-fold cross-validation.
Our results showed that the FTO, CBARA1, CHUK, SLIT3, and NRXN3 genes are strongly associated with obesity. In addition, our approach provided more information about possible GxG interactions. Note that some SNPs having weak main effects showed strong interactions with other SNPs (Table 3). It would have been very difficult to detect these SNPs through single SNP analysis, which demonstrates the usefulness of our approach in detecting GxG interactions.
In addition, our analysis provided some novel interactions that have not been reported in previous studies. For example, 9 SNPs from the FTO gene were found to have interactions with SNPs from CNNM2, AS3MT, and NT5C2. Similar interactions were found between LOC301738 and PDZRN4, as shown in Fig. 1.
Our network graph summarizes two-way interactions between SNPs very efficiently. We expect that this visualization tool could be helpful to researchers. It is also quite efficient to identify specific patterns and hub genes.
Through our network graph analysis, we also identified several pieces of evidence that supported the identified interactions with known biological information. From the investigation with four published databases, we found that 39% of a total of 179 interactions with CVC = 10 are known to have biological interactions from the four databases we collected. In addition, our network graph analysis showed a higher identification rate of shared biological relevance when the CVC was large than when the CVC was low, which suggests that interactions having a high value of CVC tend to share more known biological evidence that are actually related the phenotype.
In summary, our network graph analysis from GxG interaction analysis successfully identified the relationship between interactions from GMDR analysis and actual biological relevance. In addition, our strategy interpreted GxG interactions very effectively in finding known biological evidence using multiple public databases, especially in finding evidence that is actually related with the phenotype.