The robustness of the backbone torsion angle method in structure alignment was partly validated before by the clustering analysis of 4 types of proteases [1]. More distant groups of proteins were used for the assessment of the accuracy of the backbone torsion angle method here. A mixed set of 30 kinases and 30 proteases were clustered, and the accuracy of delineation was analyzed with the resulting 1,770 pairs (Fig. 4). Trees of clustering from logPr (Fig. 4A) and RamRMSD (Fig. 4B) measurements showed an apparent delineation of kinases from proteases. The distances between these two groups were very long, so that one could easily recognize the perfect separation of each from the other. The distances among kinases and proteases each were rather comparable in the case of logPr measurements, while RamRMSD showed much shorter distances of proteases than those of the kinases. The difference between the distances of the two measurements might have originated from the weighting of the smaller distance in the case of logPr, which might have caused the distances among kinases to shrink. The logPr and RamRMSD tree showed a smaller distance between internodes than the distance between terminal leaves and the last internode, indicating that structural information is quite homogeneous within the group of identical functional homology. The clear discrimination of two homology group members indicates that the structural classification is strongly robust with the backbone torsion angle method, especially in the case of a lucid functional difference.
The clustering tree from the TM-align RMSD measurement did not show clear delineations between kinases and proteases, while it showed some aggregations of each as subclusters (Fig. 4C). Though 22 kinases were posed close to each other, members of this major cluster of kinases were in very close proximity to members of the protease group, making them hard to be clearly separated from proteases, referring the pair-wise distances. Furthermore, 8 kinases were posed within the cluster of proteases. The distribution of pair-wise distances among 60 proteins was also rather even. This incomplete separation markedly shows the better ability of our backbone torsion angle method than the conventional 3D alignment algorithm, like the TM-align method. The inferior performance of TM-align might be due to the inconsideration of connectional information among the matched Cα atoms. Neglect of this information might have made the algorithm crucially vulnerable to the similar ostensible shape, with different topology of the connecting backbones. According to our previous finding [2], the proteins generally adopt strong globular structures, and the most significant difference among proteins is the topology of the backbone structure. Thus, there is a possibility that TM-align might have been misled by the general globular positions of Cα atoms. This partly indicates the robustness of backbone torsion angle alignments and the possible problems of 3D methods that neglect the connectional information of matched reference points.
The numerical measurement of accuracy of both of our new backbone torsion angle-based method and the typical 3D method of TM-align was performed with ROC curve analysis (Fig. 4D). Fortunately, our new method, with both logPr and RamRMSD measurements, showed perfect accuracy, with an AUROC of 1.0, which means that every pair-wise distance might be correctly classified as true or false pairs. This clear discrimination reflects the long distance between the two groups in the trees of logPr and RamRMSD measurements (Fig. 4A and 4B). The TM-align method with RMSD and TM-score measurements, however, showed no marked improvements in this more clearly distinctive set than the set of protease subtypes of a previous study [1], possibly indicating less robustness of 3D methods in more distinctive cases of functional differences. This is also shown by the similarity of the AUROCs of the RMSD (0.6846) and TM-score (0.6319) to the previous ones of 0.5965 and 0.5494 each. The TM-score result showed worse performance than that of the RMSD result in the TM-align method assessment.