It is widely accepted that mutation is the main causal factor for diverse tumorigenesis [1, 2]. The recent development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies has revolutionized the speed and throughput of DNA sequencing, which facilitates the discovery of new driver mutations [3]. For example, the ARID1A gene is mutated in 83% of gastric cancers with microsatellite instability and the SF3B1 gene is somatically mutated in 9.7% of chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients [4, 5]. In colorectal cancers, although the majority of recurrent mutations have been previously known, some novel mutations, such as the mutations in the SOX9 and FAM123B genes, were also identified by NGS technology, which may have implications for colorectal tumorigenesis [6]. In melanoma, approximately 40% was found to have causal mutations affecting B-Raf function [7]. Along with the well-known driver mutations, the novel mutations identified by NGS will be useful for predicting the prognosis and molecular characterization of cancers [8, 9].
Recently, a number of mutation calling tools, such as VarScan [10], Genome Analysis ToolKit [11], and MuTect [12], have been developed to detect single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) or indels from NGS data. However, SNV calling from a single cancer case is not the final step for defining clinically meaningful mutations. To define the pathogenic SNVs in human cancers, a commonly used approach is to identify the phenotype-associated recurrent mutations in the study group. Due to the data size burden of NGS output, profiling the mutations associated with a certain phenotype or prognosis in a study group by a researcher who does not have a bioinformatics background or facilities is very difficult. Currently, there is no user-friendly tool supporting methods for the detection of recurrent or phenotype-specific mutations.
In this study, in order to support the definition of recurrent mutations or phenotype-specific mutations from NGS data of a group of cancers with diverse phenotypes, we aimed to develop a user-friendly tool, named mutation arranger for defining phenotype-related SNV (MAP).