Various proteins interact with DNA in the nucleus. These interactions include many essential cellular processes, such as DNA replication, recombination, repair, transcription, and histone modifications [1]. Recent works have established that the eukaryotic chromatin is a dynamic and complex assembly of DNA, RNA, and proteins and is regulated by various post-translational modifications, including histone modifications, DNA methylation, long-range interactions, and non-coding RNAs [2]. The development of chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with chip or sequencing (ChIP-chip and later ChIP-Seq) has provided powerful methods to elucidate the complex interaction between DNA and proteins in the nucleus and has produced interesting data on complex DNA-protein interactions in the cell. By allowing genomewide analysis of DNA-protein interactions and histone modifications, ChIP-Seq has become one of the essential methods for genomic and epigenomic research.
Along with the development of ChIP-Seq data generation methods, various algorithms, methods, and tools have been developed for various steps during ChIP-Seq data analysis. Now, the standard ChIP-Seq data analysis process consists of a quality check (QC), mapping, peak calling, statistical analysis, annotation, and visualization. There are several well-known tools for these steps: ‘Trim Galore’ is one of the best programs to trim fastq reads, and ‘FastQC’ is also one of the major tools for quality control and pre-processing of fastq files. These tools are found at http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/. Bowtie and bwa are two representative tools for read mapping [34]. For peak calling, MACS2 is one of the most widely used tools in ChIP-Seq data analysis [5]. ‘MAnorm’ can be conveniently used for statistical analysis of ChIP-Seq data [6], and ‘PAVIS’ is available for biological interpretation of ChIP-Seq peaks in a user-friendly web interface [7]. While many tools have been developed for ChIP-Seq data analysis, no tool can provide all the necessary steps of ChIP-Seq data analysis in one environment. Also, many of the ChIP-Seq analysis tools need Unix-like environments (e.g., UNIX/LINUX or Mac OS X); so, most users of the Windows operating system have difficulty in using them.
The Bioconductor project, which was launched in 2001, now contains more than 2,000 packages that facilitate the analysis and interpretation of high-throughput genomic data. As the Bioconductor project is based on the R statistical language, which is available for all of the major operating systems, most packages in Bioconductor can be run across different operating systems. In this regard, packages in the Bioconductor project provide an excellent platform for developing a streamlined analysis pipeline that can be run independently of platform. In this work, we selected four packages (dada2 [8], QuasR [9], mosaics [10], and ChIPseeker [11]) from the Bioconductor project, and made a ChIP-Seq data analysis pipeline that performs all the essential steps in one script. We hope that this example will help biologists with few bioinformatics skills in their analysis of ChIP-Seq data.