For the past several decades, many statistical methods have been developed to detect genetic variants in genome-wide association studies (GWASs) [1], since high-throughput genotyping technologies have provided a large scale of genetic information, such as microarray expression data, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), copy number variants, and so forth. In most early GWASs, a single-SNP approach was widely used to identify genetic variations associated with common and complex diseases, because it is relatively easy and efficient to estimate and test the effect of genetic variants. However, this single-SNP approach yields the missing heritability problem [2], because many complex diseases are naturally related to multiple genes and their interactions, rather than a single-SNP. Thus, many approaches for solving the missing heritability problem have been studied, such as meta-analysis, analysis of rare variants from next-generation sequencing, and analysis of gene-gene interactions. This paper focuses on the analysis of gene-gene interactions associated with the survival phenotype in prospective studies. Since the analysis of gene-gene interactions involves high-dimension variables, the method for reducing high-dimension to lower-dimension variables is practically useful to estimate the effects of genes and their interactions with the appropriate models.
As a strategy to reduce the dimension of high-order variables, the multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method has been proposed by Ritchie et al. [3], in which multi-level genotypes are efficiently reduced into a binary attribute to detect non-linear patterns of gene-gene interactions in GWASs. The MDR method originally was proposed for a binary phenotype in a case-control study, and it is a nonparametric and genetic model-free approach. The key idea of MDR is to classify multi-dimensional genotypes into one-dimensional binary attributes by pooling genotypes of multiple SNPs using a well-defined statistic, such as the ratio of cases and controls. Many modifications for MDR have been proposed by generalizing the binary phenotype to quantitative traits and survival time with various classifiers. For example, Lou et al. [4] proposed a generalized MDR (GMDR), which includes both binary and continuous phenotypes and uses a score-based residual to classify multi-level genotypes into high- and low-risk groups. In addition, the GMDR allows for the adjustment of covariates, such as many demographic variables.
In addition, the constructive induction algorithm of MDR has also been extended to investigate gene-gene interactions associated with the survival phenotype. Gui et al. [5] first proposed a novel approach, called Survival-MDR (Surv-MDR), for detecting gene-gene interactions with survival times using the combinatorial algorithm of MDR. The Surv-MDR method replaces case-control ratios by a log-rank test statistic with survival time. Thus, the balanced accuracy is replaced by a log-rank test statistic, but the other cross-validation procedure for selecting the best model is unchanged. It has been shown that Surv-MDR has better power than traditional Cox regression models through intensive simulation studies. Also, Surv-MD has successfully identified the SNP-SNP interactions associated with survival time in bladder cancer data, as shown in Andrew et al. [6]. However, there exists a weakness of Surv-MDR, which can not adjust the effect of the covariate, because it uses the log-rank test statistic as a classifier.
To overcome the disadvantage of Surv-MDR, Lee et al. [7] proposed a simple method, called Cox-MDR, which uses a martingale residual as a classifier and allows for the adjustment of covariates. Similarly, Oh and Lee [8] proposed another method, called AFT-MDR, which uses a standardized residual as a new classifier. In an accelerated failure time model, the standardized residual is the normalized difference between the observed log survival time and the expected log survival time under the assumed model. Thus, it can be interpreted that a positive standardized residual implies a longer survival effect, while a negative standardized residual implies a shorter survival effect than expected. It is reasonable to classify subjects into high- and low-risk groups by the standardized residual, since it can be interpreted as a measure of association between putative genetic factors and survival time. Furthermore, AFT-MDR can adjust for the effect of covariates under the framework of the accelerated failure time regression model, unlike Surv-MDR.
However, both Surv-MDR and AFT-MDR only provide the best pair of SNPs, which is selected by 10-fold cross-validation, and the significance of a gene-gene interaction is achieved by intensive permutations. Recently, Yu et al. [9] proposed a unified model-based MDR (UM-MDR) method to overcome the disadvantage of MDR, which needs permutation tests for the significance of the effect of the best pair of SNPs. The UM-MDR method includes two steps for investigating gene-gene interactions, in which multi-dimensional genotypes are classified into high- and low-risk groups, and then, an indicator for the high-risk group is defined in the first step. In the second step of the UM-MDR method, the indicator variable for the high-risk group is considered a covariate, with other adjusted covariates in the regression model. Then, the significance of a gene-gene interaction is obtained by testing the indicator variable of the high-risk group.
Through simulation studies, we compared the proposed method with AFT-MDR with and without the main effect using 70 different penetrance models listed by Velez et al. [10]. From the simulation results, the power of the proposed method is similar to that of AFT-MDR when the main effect is not considered, but it performs better than AFT-MDR when the censoring fraction is greater than 0.3. In addition, the power of the proposed method is much greater than that of AFT-MDR when the main effect is considered, while AFT-MDR has no power when there is a strong main effect. The power of the proposed method also decreases as the censoring fraction increases.