Improving efficiency is an important issue in new drug development. Although there have been considerable advances in science and technology, the number of approved new drugs per research spending has continuously declined over 60 years [1]. Dramatic improvements were made in pre-clinical research areas, but the successful clinical development rate of new drug candidates has not changed in recent years [1]. To improve efficiency in clinical trials, enrichment strategies were proposed in several disease areas, which enable precision medicine in drug development [2–4].
Various omics technologies have been used in recent clinical trials to elucidate the various characteristics of new drug candidates and to identify optimal subjects for the trials [5–10]. Pharmacogenomics is used in clinical trials to select appropriate patients and to further explain pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, efficacy, and adverse drug reactions of new drug candidates [6–8]. Pharmacometabolomics can be used in clinical trials to identify drug targets, diagnosis disease, assess drug metabolic enzyme function in humans, and monitor the drug response and toxicity [9–13]. The importance of those evaluations is high in early phase clinical trials because it can help to simplify late phase clinical trials and increase the probability of success of clinical trials [5].
In this report, we present a case showing how pharmacogenomics and pharmacometabolomics were used in an early phase new drug development clinical trials. Drug X is a transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) antagonist class of new drug candidate that is under clinical development for the treatment of atopic dermatitis. In a first-in-human clinical trial for drug X, large inter-individual variability in the plasma concentration was observed after a single oral administration. Furthermore, moderate adverse drug reactions were observed in certain group of subjects. To perform subsequent clinical trials safely and efficiently, we needed to understand the cause of the inter-individual variability observed in the early phase clinical trial for drug X.
The aim of this study was to investigate the mechanism of the variability in plasma concentration of drug X and the adverse drug reaction by integrated multi-omics analysis using pharmacogenomics and pharmacometabolomics tools.