The advantages of DTC genetic testing can be described as follows [1,2]. First, DTC genetic testing may provide an opportunity for consumers to recognize the importance of genetics in diverse phenotypes, including diseases. If the test results indicate that a consumer has a genetic predisposition to a certain disease or phenotype of interest, then he or she may take proactive steps to improve his or her own health. It is easy to access genetic information through DTC testing because it does not require approval from clinicians or insurance companies. Moreover, DTC genetic testing is generally less expensive and faster than genetic testing performed at hospitals. The sample is normally collected non-invasively, such as through gathering saliva or scratching the inside of one’s mouth with a cotton swab, instead of drawing blood, as is performed at the hospital. Lastly, the data from consumers’ genetic tests can be collected into valuable databases to help with research in related fields, as shown by the papers published by 23andMe, one of the leading DTC genetic testing companies in the United States [3,4].
Nonetheless, DTC genetic testing has important drawbacks [1,2]. DTC genetic testing often does not provide conclusive results on whether the consumer will develop a disease or not. Most genetic tests performed by DTC companies are limited to few major genetic variants related to the phenotypes of interest, which leads to poor discriminatory power. Diseases are generally affected by many genetic variants—in other words, they are polygenic. In addition to genetic factors, disease incidence is influenced by environmental and lifestyle factors including age, sex, race, nutrition, exercise, and stress. Thus, DTC genetic testing itself does not guarantee that a consumer with a high genetic risk score will suffer from a certain disease. Instead, it only indicates that one has a genetic propensity for that disease. If one is affected by favorable environmental factors and has a lifestyle that is beneficial for that disease, one may not develop the disease despite a high genetic risk. On the contrary, a consumer with a low genetic risk may get sick if he or she lives in a disease-prone environment or has lifestyle factors that increase susceptibility to the disease. For example, 23andMe conducts an APOE genetic test in relation to Alzheimer disease. The average likelihood of developing Alzheimer disease in carriers of the relevant allele is more than twice as high than in people who do not carry it. However, not everyone with the APOE e4 gene will develop Alzheimer disease, and having the APOE e2 gene, which confers resistance to Alzheimer disease, is likewise not a guarantee that one will never get Alzheimer disease. Consumers sometimes experience stress when they receive unexpected test results, especially if the results are related to serious diseases, such as cancer [5]. It is recommended that the results of cancer genetic testing be examined after consultation with clinicians, since the genetic test results related to cancer may have significant impacts on consumers. There are also many different genetic variants that are related to a specific cancer but not available for DTC genetic testing. For example, only three genetic variants are examined for genetic testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 conducted by 23andMe with U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval. However, as many as 1,000 mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 are known to affect the risk of breast and ovarian cancer. Furthermore, family history is known to explain only about 5%–10% of cancer cases. A wide variety of factors, including age, sex, nutrition, exercise, race, disease history, hormonal factors, and reproductive factors, can affect the development of cancer. Consumers may make decisions on their own with inaccurate or non-deterministic DTC results, and take actions that can damage their health without appropriate consultation with clinicians. Lastly, there is often a lack of scientific evidence for the genetic tests carried out by DTC companies, and consumers’ genetic information may be used for other purposes without their approval or might even be stolen due to inappropriate security measures.