Insulin resistance is a condition in which tissues, such as skeletal muscle, liver, and adipocytes, fail to respond to insulin, leading to type 2 diabetes mellitus. Because skeletal muscle is the primary tissue of insulin-mediated glucose uptake [1], it would be important to study the insulin effects on gene expression in skeletal muscle and to identify the insulin-responsive target genes and regulatory genes.
DNA microarray techniques have been widely used in biological research by enabling comprehensive understanding of molecular and systematic mechanism [23]. In addition, microarray experiments enable researchers to identify gene sets undergoing a response to a specific stimulus as well as to analyze dynamic response at the level of gene regulatory network [4]. Especially, microarray experiments could be designed to study downstream effects of a specific stimulus or diverse stimuli on gene expression at the level of genomic scale, not a single genetic one [5]. Microarray techniques could be a power tool to discover regulatory factors as most of co-expressed genes are co-regulated by the same regulatory factors [6]. Moreover, because genes co-regulated by the same transcription factor (TF) commonly share binding sites for this TF [6], it would be worth to detect TF based on motif discovery method.
Although diverse motif discovery methods have been proposed and refined [78910], most of them are restricted to using human annotated position weight matrices (PWM). On the other hand, iRegulon, a user-friendly Cytoscape plugin, provides approximately nine thousand PWMs that have been collected from various sources and from different species and enable to make regulatory network by linking them to candidate TF [11]. The other approach for pathway analysis is Genomica [12], which yields regulatory modules from gene expression based on probabilistic graphical models and Bayesian networks. It has a benefit in directly mirroring expression of their target genes in a specific condition by comparing expressions between regulators and their target genes [12]. However, this approach requires looping over all regulators, taking too much time in big data.
Here, we tried to construct a regulatory network in order to understand the regulation of insulin-response genes. We identified about 560 genes differentially expressed between before and after treatment in insulin sensitive individuals, and found that those genes act for insulin signaling biological process through Gene Ontology (GO) analysis. Furthermore, we report a reliable regulatory network cont-rolling insulin-mediated genes by integrating motif-based approach using iRegulon and expression-based approach using Genomica; thereby present some benefits for the construction.