Recent data have shown the inextricable relationship between diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HT), and coronary artery disease (CAD). For instance, approximately 70% of patients with DM reported being affected by HT, which is about twice as common in patients with DM as in those without it [1]. Furthermore, patients with both DM and HT were reported to have double the risk for CAD, which is the most prevalent cause of morbidity in type 1 or type 2 DM [2]. However, the underlying genetic contributions driving the increased prevalence of HT and CAD in diabetic patients are poorly understood.
There have been many studies seeking to understand the mechanisms of complex traits using a single-locus-based approach, but they have not been capable of explaining their complicated genetic effects. Instead, it is necessary to consider the joint genetic effects produced through the simultaneous perturbation of epistatically interacting variants. Consequently, epistasis is now increasingly assumed to be an important factor in demonstrating complex disease, and there are many studies in which evidence of epistasis has been found [3].
Unfortunately, in spite of such efforts, most such studies usually have been conducted in a European descent cohort [4] and have not included any Asian patients. In this work, we performed a genomewide epistasis analysis using the East Asian cohort from Korea Association Resource (KARE) data. This is meaningful work, because obvious differences exist between ethnically diverse populations, such as susceptibility genes, allele frequency, and linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure.
Most genetic variants associated with complex disease are usually located in non-coding genomic regions, and many studies have suggested that such variants might be involved in a transcriptional regulatory role [5]. In this regard, when building an appropriate model, it can be very limiting to assign affected genes using only the nearest ones. For systematic annotation, therefore, we have suggested extensive non-coding variant annotation using regulatory elements, including promoters and distal enhancers. In this work, we illustrate how this annotation method can be used to establish a reasonable genetic model in complex diseases.