Penguins are a monophyletic group within the Spheniscidae family [1]. Approximately 18 species breed sympatrically in several regions within Antarctica and the sub-Antarctic islands [2]. Pygoscelids include three species of penguin (Adélie Pygoscelis adeliae, chinstrap P. antarctica, and gentoo P. papua), and represent congeneric penguins based on their co-occurrence, coexistence, and similarities in their breeding and foraging ecologies [3-5]. Pygoscelids are densely distributed throughout the South Shetland and South Orkney Islands between the latitudes 54°S and 65°S. The chinstraps have a more southern distribution and are located almost exclusively around the Antarctic Peninsula [1,6]. The gentoo have the most northern distribution and forage deeper in the water column. The Adélie and chinstrap are relatively ice-tolerant and depend on ice more than the gentoo [1,6]. In 2017, pygoscelids were placed on the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List of Threatened Species at the level of Least Concern (http://www.iucnredlist.org). Because their habitats are strongly correlated with Antarctic environmental conditions, fluctuations in the marine environment due to global warming could be the most obvious factor influencing their declining populations [7]. Therefore, consistent monitoring and conservation of pygoscelids is highly recommended.
Penguins serve as important models for studying ecology, the environment, physiology, behavior, reproduction, and population dynamics [8,9]. Antarctica is continuously threated by anthropogenic activities affecting the atmosphere and water including climate change, over-fishing, disease, and tourism [10-12]. Penguins are promising sentinels for monitoring marine pollution and disease in Antarctica given their high trophic position, long lifespan, philopatry, and conspicuous nature [8,9]. While previous studies have analyzed pathogen diversity or toxicant accumulation from penguin blood samples [13-18], to date there have been no published gene expression studies from the blood of any penguin species.
In this study, we analyzed the blood transcriptome of chinstrap (P. antarcticus) and gentoo (P. papua) penguins using Illumina MiSeq sequencing and a series of bioinformatics tools. Given that blood is highly sensitive to diverse endogenous and exogenous stimulations, including parasites, pathogens, and environmental pollutants, transcriptomic profiling and the measurement of target gene/pathway-specific expression is useful for predicting homeostasis, disease, immunity, and population health status in penguins. Although genomic analyses of penguin blood have been limited, several analytical applications have been conducted on their blood tissues. For example, blood-borne parasitic infections are a potential factor for the mortality of wild penguins [19-21]. Chemical analyses (i.e., dioxins, persistent organic pollutants, polychlorinated biphenyls, and pesticides) of blood samples from penguins have been used as a promising indicator of Antarctic environmental contamination [22-25]. In fact, among birds, blood transcriptome profiling has been successfully employed to predict the homeostasis of immune systems and to analyze transcriptional changes after pathogen or pollutant challenges [26-30]. Thus, genomic information from penguin blood samples will allow the evaluation of their health status using gene expression analyses to determine their immune status.