The transposable element (TE) was first described by McClintock [1] as a controlling element that jumps from one position to another in the maize chromosome in the mid-1940s, long before the discovery by Watson and Crick of the double helix structure of DNA as a genetic element [2]. It was a time when, after the rediscovery of Mendel's Law of Heredity in 1900, the cytogenetic study of chromosomes was at the forefront of genetics and when genes were thought to be beads on a string located on the chromosome. It was in the late 1970s and early 1980s when insertion sequence (IS) elements and transposons (Tn) were discovered and found to be similar to McClintock's controlling elements, and her AC/DS elements were confirmed at the DNA sequence level as a TE [3]. Salient features of DNA transposable elements (dTEs), including terminal inverted repeats (TIRs), target site duplication (TSD), the transposase gene, and simple and replicative transposition mechanisms have been well established by extensive molecular biology and biochemistry studies [4]. Then, retrotransposable elements (rTEs), including long terminal repeat (LTR)-retrotransposons, non-LTR-retrotransposons, and other retro-elements, were being added to the repertoire since the 1980s to make the picture diverse and complicated [5]. Many new families of TEs are being added, especially from eukaryotes, even by computational screening in the post-genome era, which has necessitated a new classification based on their structures and mechanisms of transposition [6].
The presence of foldback intercoil (FBI) DNA was first reported by Kim in 1985 [7] and shown by a space filling model to mediate intra-molecular homologous recombination of inversions and deletions. It was further shown in 1987 that FBI DNA can mediate inter-molecular DNA rearrangements, such as site-specific insertions, at the foldback tip and DNA transpositional integration at the intercoil end of the detached dTE [8]. It will be examined in this review how FBI DNA mediation of transposition can be extended to different classes and families of rTEs. Readers are suggested to refer to many good reviews available on the classification, structures, genetic contents, and function of the gene products and on the mechanisms of transposition with excellent diagrammatic illustrations [5, 9, 10, 11, 12]. This review will minimize duplicate descriptions and focus on the mechanistic features that are relevant to the application of FBI DNA to the mechanisms of DNA transposition.