Cancer has a complex pathophysiology unlike other diseases. The development of cancer is attributed to a number of predisposing factors like familial and genetic factors, racial and geographic factors and various epidemiological factors like smoking, use of tobacco, diet, and certain type of infection. Majority of the cancers occur in ageing population [1], however there is a changing trend towards younger population in recent years. The uncontrolled division of cancer cells generally spreads to the other part of body through the blood and lymphatic systems. In this context, solid cancer which is an abnormal mass of tissue that usually does not contain cysts or liquid area can be either benign or malignant in nature. Such solid cancers are observed in tissues of epithelial or endothelial cells of lung, breast, prostate, pancreatic, colorectal, stomach, and bladder. Management of cancer is a multimodality approach and includes surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and targeted therapy with certain limitations of each approach. Research is going across the globe for the management of cancer. Recently microRNAs (miRNAs) have drawn attention of the researchers to discover new insights into the treatment of cancer. These miRNAs are highly conserved non-coding single stranded RNAs (~18 to 22 bp) that target mRNA at 3' un-translated region of protein coding genes and act as natural inhibitor. These miRNAs participate in several biological processes such as cell differentiation, proliferation, metabolism, and apoptosis and are also involved in the regulation of gene expression [2]. However, in development of pathologies like cancer, deregulation of miRNAs expression has been identified as potential area to be studied. The miRNAs have special signature and variation from normal cells [3]. Hence, use of specific miRNAs as biomarker may be applied for cancer diagnosis and treatment. Since the expression of tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes are influenced by the miRNAs, provides scope to study their association in cancer [3]. Collating data for miRNAs signatures associated with solid tumors, it was reported that more than 50% of miRNAs genes are located in cancer associated genomic regions or in fragile sites, suggesting that miRNAs play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of a limited range of human cancers than previously expected [4]. Considering their influence on the cancer cell phenotype, some miRNAs are considered to be oncogenic, and others to be tumor-suppressive [5]. Few miRNAs are well characterized in cancer association such as miR-21, miR-17-5p, miR-191, miR-29b-2, miR-223, miR-128b, miR-199a-1, miR-24-1, miR-24-2, miR-146, miR-155, miR-181b-1, miR-20a, miR-107, miR-32, miR-92-2, miR-214, miR-30c, miR-25, miR-221, miR-106a, miR-126, and miR-31 (Supplementary Table 1) that are involved in either up regulation or down regulation of many genes [4243444546474849505152535455565758]. Till date various researchers have explored the unusual expression of miRNAs, and its prognostic significance in various human malignancies. Hence, to study the relationship between miRNAs and cancer, it is important to examine the expression profile of miRNAs and their target genes in different cancer types. As a case study, the unusual expression of miRNA-21 has been conformed in various cancers such as lung, breast, prostate, colorectal, pancreatic, bladder, and stomach cancer, and interestingly the oncogenic like function of miRNA-21 is mediated through the expression of its target genes like PDCD4, PTEN, and TGFBR2 which are generally tumor suppressor genes in nature [59]. Though miRNAs control the gene expression to some extent during translation process but the translational suppression mechanism is still controversial, for example some miRNAs down-regulate while others up-regulate the gene expression. Hence, study of interaction mechanism between miRNAs and their target genes is essential. In the process of miRNAs mediated gene regulation, the Argonaute (AGO) class of proteins play a significant role in the hybrid formation between miRNA-mRNA [6061]. Despite of several researches, controlling this abnormal cell proliferation selectively in different cancer by miRNAs as natural inhibitor is still a major challenge. In the present study, attempts have been made to develop a strategy for identification and selection of suitable miRNAs, their target genes associated in solid tumor, and as well as to study the role of AGO protein in their interaction at molecular level using computational tools and techniques.