The genetic background of patients with complex diseases, such as cancer, has been continually studied. Traditional attempts mainly focus on finding unique differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for diagnosis or survival times using microarray techniques [1, 2]. Genetic markers can be indicators of the activity state of a pathway of therapy, showing their potential as prognostic predictors for specific treatments. Ovarian cancer, especially high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), is one of the most lethal gynecological malignancies in women. Vague symptoms and a lack of robust biomarkers for detection are the main causes of difficulties in making an early diagnosis. Major factors associated with the poor prognosis and poor management of ovarian cancers include the late discovery of the disease, chemotherapy resistance, and a lack of clinical variables that are crucial for accurate prognostic predictions [3]. Thus, there is a need to identify new biomarkers that can be used to improve the treatment of ovarian cancer patients [4].
Previous studies have mainly focused on identifying novel molecular markers or subtyping through molecular markers of HGSC [5,6]. In this study, we aim to identify clinical and genetic markers of the prognosis of HGSC. Through analyzing high-dimensional genetic information, we can gain a better understanding of HGSC and its biological mechanism. For cancers with a poor prognosis, genetic information can be effective in improving the prognosis of patients based only on clinical information [3].
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has made it possible to generate mRNA expression data for the tens of thousands of genes from only a few hundred samples [7]. These RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data have the advantage of knowing the sequence count directly, without being affected by the background noise, unlike microarray data. RNA-Seq data also contain more genes to discover than microarray data. High-throughput NGS-based tumor genome profiling has significantly advanced our understanding of the molecular variability exhibited by tumors.
However, the nature of RNA-Seq data, consisting of non-negative count data, requires a new predictive model that differs from that of microarray data. For RNA-Seq data, it is difficult to apply a traditional statistical approach because of its relatively small number of samples compared with the large number of genes. Therefore, we present a process for finding genes that play important roles in the outcome and specific procedures for designing and evaluating a model, based on the characteristics of RNA-Seq data.
The purpose of this study is to find gene markers that can significantly affect the prognosis, when analyzing RNA-Seq data, and to present a protocol that can improve the predictive performance using transcription data by integrating clinical information. Specifically, we present a protocol to build a prediction model for the prognosis of HGSC, including (1) selection of markers and clinical variables and (2) model construction and evaluation.