The genomes of the species in Liliaceae are highly variable in 1C-value, ranging from 3.4 pg in Prosartes smithii to 127.4 pg in Fritillaria assyriaca [92]. Especially, the species in the subclasses Lilieae and Tulipeae in the Lilioideae subfamily harbor large genomes in the Liliaceae family. By comparative analysis of the relationship of genome size with phylogenetic among 78 species in Liliaceae, Leitch et al. [92] demonstrated that the ancestral genome size of the Liliaceae species was 6.73 pg, and punctuated genome size evolution occurred twice in Liliaceae. The first genome size evolution was at the base of the polytomy divergence in Liliaceae, which was associated with a shift from the smaller genomes to the larger genomes of the Lilioideae (median C value, 14.2-50.9 pg) and Medeoloideae (median C value, 14.2-18.9 pg) subfamilies. Table 2 shows the genomic features of two genera, Lilium and Fritillaria, in the Lilioideae subfamily. The second genomic evolution was at the divergence of Lilioideae from Medeoloideae, which was about 12 million years ago [93]. Punctuated genomic evolution that led to speciation was also observed at the molecular level in other species [94]. The subfamily Medeoloideae is a sister subfamily to Lilioideae in the Liliaceae family. While the species in Medeoloideae bear rhizomes, inconspicuous flowers, fleshy animal-dispersed fruits, and broad reticulate-veined leaves, the species in Lilioideae show bulbs, showy flowers, winddispersed seeds, and narrow parallel-veined leaves in open habitats [93, 95]. Because these ecological shifts and the adaptive morphological features coincided with the appearance of a large genome size, an adaptive role of genome size in Lilioideae is suggested-i.e., if the large genome has any selective advantage. However, as argued by Leitch et al. [92], there was no tendency toward increasing genome size from the ancestral species, having about 6.73 pg. Their proposal was that the large genomes of Lilioideae were a necessary or random consequence, simply due to the large diversification at the base of the clade. Oliver et al. [96] proposed a theory that genomic size evolution is proportional to genome size, with the fastest rates occurring in the larger genomes, among 20 major eukaryotic clades. So, the larger genomes of Lilium and Fritillaria in Lilioideae might have drifted away to even larger genomes with an increased rate of genome size evolution [92].
Although species in the genus Lilium have been known to carry large genomes, studies of transposable elements have not been carried out extensively. The genome of the species in the genus Lilium spans from 32.8 to 47.9 pg, with a mean value of 39.6 pg [92]. A Ty3/gypsy retrotransposon, del-1, was isolated from Lilium henryi [86]. Del-1 Ty3/gypsy was present in approximately 13,000 copies in the L. henryi genome, which accounts for 1% of the genome of L. henryi. By DNA reassociation analysis, Joseph et al. [97] showed that Cot1 repeated DNAs constitute 2.2% of the L. henryi genome, whereas they constitute 9.7% in L. longiflorum. In a Southern blot analysis with 14 Lilium species, del-1 Ty3/gypsy retrotransposons showed high copy variation, at least a 100-fold difference, among Lilium species, implying that the del-1 Ty3/gypsy element was highly active after divergence of the genus Lilium. The integration time of del-1 Ty3/gypsy was estimated to be about 0.6 million years ago (mya) in L. henryi and 1.6 mya in L. longiflorum [16]. Del-2 is a LINE-like element found in Lilium speciosum [98, 99]. Del-2 is 4.5 kb in size and is present in 240,000 copies, constituting about 4% of the L. speciosum genome [99]. Del-2-related sequences were also highly abundant in Tulip and bluebells (Scilla nonsripta, both in Liliaceae), Hyacinthaceae, Amarylidaceae, and Alliaceae plants but less abundant in other monocots, such as Poaceae, implying that they are specific to the Liliaceae family. LINEs are highly abundant in mammals, but they are scant in most plant species [23, 31]. However, the del-2 LINE-like elements are highly abundant in species of the Liliaceae family. LIREs (lily retroelement) are Ty1/copia retrotransposons isolated from L. longiflorum [16]. LIREs showed approximately the same abundance as the del-1 Ty3/gypsy retrotransposon in species of the genus Lilium. However, unlike the del2 LINEs, LIRE Ty1/copia retrotransposons are absent in other species, such as tulips, Narcissus, Ipheion, Hosta longgips, and O. sativa. We mined eight Ty1/copia elements from Lilium lancifolium (unpulished). Characterization of these retrotransposons may provide more information on the Ty1/copia retrotransposons in the genus Lilium. The genus Fritillaria is a sister genus in the Lilieae subclass in the Lilioideae subfamily. The Fritillaria species harbor an even larger genome (min. 30.8 pg, max. 89.2 pg, mean 50.9 pg) than Lilium species [92]. In F. affinis (1C = 45.6 pg) and F. imperialis (1C = 43.0 pg), chromovirus-like sequences and Tat lineage Ty3/gypsy retrotransposons are predominant in both species [100]. Not only do retrotransposons contribute to the gigantic Fritillaria genome, satellite DNAs also FriSAT1 repeats also contribute highly to the Fritillaria genome. The FriSAT1 repeats constitute approximately 26% of the F. affinis genome [100]. With these results, they argued that there are no predominant repeats that track the increasing/decreasing trends of genome size in Fritillaria. Instead, many diverse families of transposable elements and repeats constitute the gigantic Fritillaria genomes. Thus, as evidenced with full-genome sequencing of the large genome of Norway spruce (P. abies) [80, 82], the highly obese Fritillaria genome may have had happened partly by the failure of the repeats to be purged effectively to counterbalance the amplification of retrotransposons.