Alternative splicing can produce multiple transcripts according to the patterns through which exons and introns are joined (Fig. 2A). Alternative splicing is known to affect more than 90% of multi-exon human genes [10]. The basic patterns include exon skipping, the use of alternative 5' or 3' splice sites, mutually exclusive exons, and intron retention. Exon skipping is the most common type of alternative splicing in animals, whereas intron retention is the least prevalent form [11]. The functional consequences of alternative splicing can be predicted using various annotation data, with possibilities including the gain/loss of protein domains, signal peptides, and coding potential [12,13]. Intron retention often leads to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) by introducing a premature termination codon, resulting in reduced gene expression [14]. These RNA-level changes can be further propagated to proteomic changes through their effects on protein-protein interaction [15]. Numerous computational methods have been developed to identify regulated splicing events in RNA-Seq data and to predict their upstream regulators in a genome-wide manner [16]. Bioinformatics tools are largely classified into two groups: tools to examine known events and tools capable of detecting novel events. The latter tools are useful for uncovering unannotated cancer-specific events, but their algorithms are complicated, and the running time is generally longer.
Numerous studies have revealed cancer-specific splicing changes, suggesting their applicability for cancer diagnosis and therapy [17-19]. Recent pan-cancer analyses using TCGA data identified that alternative splicing events are indeed frequently altered in cancer and some of them can contribute to the oncogenic process. The altered events take place through a variety of cis- and trans-acting regulatory factors. Aberrant splicing patterns can be induced by genetic variants in splicing regulatory sequences around splice sites. The variants near splice sites are more likely to have functional effects on splicing by disrupting existing splice sites or creating new sites [20,21]. In addition to variants that directly change splice sites, common variants throughout the genome can be associated with the splicing phenotype. These are termed splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTL), and they can be analyzed by integrating population-scale genotype and RNA-Seq data [22,23]. Lastly, trans-acting splicing regulators can activate or repress splicing of their target exons [24].
With growing interest in cancer immunotherapy, two recent studies evaluated the contributions of alternative splicing to neoantigen production. The first study performed a comprehensive analysis of alternative splicing with the development of an integrated workflow utilizing large-scale genomics datasets [7]. Kahles et al. [25] identified quantitative differences in splicing between cancer and normal samples, and their enrichment in splicing categories also differed. For example, splicing regulation in cancer samples was enhanced in the categories of alternative 3' splice sites and mutually exclusive exons. That research group previously developed the SplAdder toolkit to identify novel splicing events with good performance in a large population [25]. Using this tool, they identified 251,000 novel exon-exon junctions (referred to as neojunctions) with an average of 930 per cancer sample. The cancer-specific junctions should be absent in the GTEx reference data, since they are rarely expressed in normal reference samples [7]. A proteomics database, containing Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) mass spectrometry data, was used to confirm the expression of peptides derived from alternative splicing. An important finding was that neoantigens derived from alternative splicing events were more frequent than single-nucleotide variants, even though the former category had relatively low levels of expression. Lastly, the study pointed out that their predictions of neoantigens were not complete for several reasons, including the fact that they excluded intron retention events from neoantigen prediction.
In this context, a recent study was meaningful because it focused on intron retention, a splicing type that was neglected in the previous study. Intron-containing peptides are often subject to degradation by NMD, and the cleaved peptides can be presented on MHC class I molecules. Smart et al. [26] developed a computational strategy to detect intron retention events from RNA-Seq data. Using two cohorts of melanoma patient data with checkpoint inhibitor treatment, they found that intron retention was an important mechanism for neoantigen prediction that should be checked, because as many intron-retaining neoantigens as somatic mutation–derived neoantigens were present in most patient samples. However, they were not associated with the clinical outcomes of checkpoint inhibitor therapy, unlike somatic mutation–derived neoantigens. Taken together, the above two studies significantly expanded the boundaries of neoantigen prediction by considering both DNA and RNA alterations.