Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been a useful tool to identify genetic variants that affect various traits [1]. Numerous novel important genetic variants associated with disease susceptibility have been identified through GWASs [2]. However, genome-wide association (GWA) results for complex diseases can generally explain only a small part of the genetic variants for complex diseases [3]. Generally, a GWA study identifying an association between a trait and a genetic variation may be limited in understanding complex diseases involving multiple functional loci [4].
Recently, many approaches to detect an association between a trait and one or multiple genetic variants have been proposed to study numerous data from GWASs [5]. Inference about linkage disequilibrium (LD), known as non-independent association of alleles at different loci, provides information for the association of genetic variants affecting complex traits [6]. Using LD analysis, it is possible to characterize multiple genomic variants associated with phenotypes in terms of haplotypes. A haplotype defines a combination of phased alleles in a chromosomal region [4]. Thus, haplotype analysis is useful to understand multiloci genetic associations and to identify susceptibility loci for diseases. In spite of the advantages of haplotype analysis, performing an analysis on a genome-wide scale is not simple, due to the uncertainty and complexity of haplotypes [7].
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of a reference population may provide insights into the potential causal variants hidden within the LD block of interest. While the 1000 Genomes Project aims to provide such information in worldwide populations or ethnic groups [8], it would be more informative to focus on a reference population on a national scale than on a global scale. Recently, several Korean reference WGS datasets have been published based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms [9]. Here, we tried to construct haplotype blocks affecting body mass index (BMI) in Korean individuals through integrative analysis of NGS and GWA data. We analyzed haplotypes using NGS data only in ranges that were nearby significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were identified by GWA results. The analysis may have several advantages in haplotype analysis. The complexity and the time can be reduced by analyzing smaller regions that are known to harbor significant GWA signals. We cataloged all possible 44 haplotype blocks within the LD blocks of significant SNPs for BMI.