Although the international consortium is now in good shape, it still has several limitations. As the IHEC aims at producing 1,000 epigenomes from ~250 human cell types, there is a limitation on tissue or cell availability. Epigenome production from extremely hard-to-get cells or tissues seems impossible to accomplish and looks even unnecessary. To overcome this limitation, there are some efforts to perform ChIP-seq with fewer than ~1,000 cells and to perform single-cell-level epigenome analysis [14]. Also, there is an individual variation issue: as epigenomes differ by individual, age, cell type, and developmental stage, it will be very hard to determine the real reference data among numerous epigenomic states. It is required to determine the exact reference epigenome more precisely. Moreover, overlapping target tissues among member institutions is a limitation. Cell types, such as blood and adipocyte, that easy to get seem to be popular targets in every IHEC member and should be coordinated in a central way to foster synergy from each mapping activity. Another issue is a limitation of international collaboration. As all funds are controlled by an individual institution's decision, drawing a concrete conclusion on a specific point is expected to be a time-consuming process. There is newly emerging technology on targeting several novel epigenome sets, such as carboxyl methylation [15], m6A RNA methylation [16], hydroxyl methylation [8], and 3D chromosomal interaction [17]. Also, collaboration with the ENCODE project on transcription factor binding site profiling should be actively considered in near future (Fig. 1). Furthermore, in the next phase of IHEC, disease epigenome should be considered. Actually, all 7 member countries are focusing on disease relatedness actively, such as the metabolic epigenome, hematopoietic epigenome, and digestive organ disorders, but more active engagement and control should be anticipated in each project's detailed goals. Extension to epigenome wide association study should also be considered to increase the clinical importance of IHEC's reference mapping efforts [9].