The World Health Organization reported that 466 million people worldwide suffers from hearing loss and estimated to rise over 900 million by 2050 [1]. Hearing loss means not able to hear as well as someone with normal hearing or a hearing threshold of more than 25 decibels in one or both ears. Hearing loss can also be classified as either conductive, sensorineural or mixed hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss is when there is a problem conducting the sound waves along the outer ear, tympanic membrane (eardrum) and ossicular chain of the middle ear towards the cochlea. Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is when there is problem translating the sound vibrations into electrical signals in the sensory hair cells (HCs) inside the cochlear or damage in transmitting the information involving the afferent nerves towards the brain. This communication between the ear and brain can be damaged by aging, acoustic overexposure and ototoxic drugs. Heredity also plays a big part wherein genes for hearing are mutated or genes may increase the susceptibility to ear damage or deterioration from aging.
Hearing loss causes an annual global deficit of US $750 billion [2] which offers a high demand for an effective solution. Conductive hearing loss can be surgically managed in most patients. In contrast, SNHL is mostly irreversible and results in permanent hearing loss. However, hearing rehabilitation is possible thru hearing devices that can either be worn externally or implanted. Despite the advances in hearing aid and cochlear implant technologies, the quality of perceived sound still cannot mimic that of the normal ear. Impaired speech perception in noisy environments and musical sound perception are the biggest hurdles of cochlear implants [3, 4].
Scientist around the world are working on genomics-based research and development in hearing science. In this review, we consolidated the genes that are currently identified to be associated with hearing loss. We reviewed ways in which genes are used to restore or protect hearing and ways to deliver the genes to their target cells such as viral and non-viral vectors. We also discussed the various strategies used in gene therapy such as gene replacement, slicing and editing.