A mature tRNA has a 5'-monophosphate group and 3'-CCA charged with cognate amino acid. All properly folded tRNAs, with so called a cloverleaf structure, have four base-paired stems (in 5'–3' direction: D arm, anticodon arm, T arm, and acceptor stem) bridging the conserved D-loop, tRNA-specific anticodon loop, variable loop, and T-loop. Primary transcripts (pre-tRNAs) undergo several stages of maturation before becoming translation-competent tRNAs [26]. Compared to a mature tRNA, a pre-tRNA lacks a CCA tail but includes a 5'-leader starting with triphosphate, a 3'-trailer with an oligouridine stretch and, for intron-containing tRNA, a variably-sized intron. The 5'- and 3'-end of a pre-tRNA are trimmed by the endonucleases RNase P and RNase Z respectively, and an intron is spliced if there is [2728]. The 'CCA' acceptor stem must be added to the 3'-end as this is not encoded in eukaryotes [29]. While mature, uncleaved tRNAs have a well-defined role in protein translation, multiple groups have cloned and sequenced shorter tRNA fragments [30]. These fragments (termed "tRFs") identified so far can be classified into three groups; tRF-5 series whose 5'-end is aligned to the 5'-end of mature tRNA, tRF-3 series whose 3'-end is aligned to the 3'-end of mature tRNA, and tRF-1 series which is the 3'-trailer sequence in a pre-tRNA and released during 3'-end processing (Fig. 1). Some groups have also termed the tRF-5 or tRF-3 series as tRF halves or type I [3132] and tRF1 series as type II [32].
The tRF-5 series were the first identified class of tRFs and were usually formed by a cleavage in the D or anticodon loop of a mature tRNA. They have been reported in mammalian cells, plants, and fission yeast [333343536]. As aforementioned, the tRF-3 series are those derived from the 3'-end of a mature tRNA, usually by cleavage in the T loop [332373839]. As the 3'-end of mature tRNAs is the acceptor trinucleotide CCA, the tRF-3 series also characteristically has an end CCA. The tRF-1 series are undoubtedly the RNase Z cleavage product of a pre-tRNA, because their 5'-ends begin immediately after the 3'-terminus of the mature tRNA and their 3'-ends are a series of U residues that are residual from RNA polymerase III transcription run-off [3324041]. Overall, the cleavage of tRFs is very much structure-dependent, suggesting they are not randomly degraded products.
Other reasons supporting that tRFs are biologically meaningful include their endonuclease-specific cleavage [343442]. The production of the tRF-5 series has been reported to be Dicer or angiogenin (ANG)-dependent in mammals [3334]. In one case, the tRF-5 series were identified to be produced after the hybridization of the 3'-end of the human cellular tRNAlys with the HIV-1 primer binding site, raising the possibility that, at least in certain cases, tRFs may be produced when a tRNA base-pairs with another RNA molecule [38]. It has been reported that the tRF-3 series are generated by Dicer [3238]. In Tetrahymena, although the nuclease identity was not proven, the tRF-3 series have 5'-monophosphates that are usually left after Dicer cleavage and are in physical association with Argonaute/Piwi proteins, suggesting Dicer-mediated cleavage [39]. The tRNA 3'-trailer sequences are thought to be rapidly degraded in the nuclear compartment soon after being cleaved from pre-tRNAs. Therefore, it is quite surprising that the tRF-1 series are localized mainly in the cytoplasm [341]. There are two explanations on how the tRF-1 series bypass nuclear cleavage: (1) the tRF-1 series are exported from the nucleus by an unknown mechanism upon processing, or (2) pre-tRNAs escape nuclear quality control and are processed by cytoplasmic RNase Z. Biological evidence indeed supports the second possibility. At least in one case of a tRF-1 molecule derived from tRNASer (termed tRF-1001 [3] and Cand45 [32]), the corresponding pre-tRNA is localized in the cytoplasm [332]. Also there are several reports supporting the cytoplasmic localization of tRNA endonucleases responsible for the tRF-1 series [343].