Since the immune system recognizes tumor-specific peptides, they are potential targets for personalized neoantigen-based immunotherapy. They are presented by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on the surface of tumor cells, which can be recognized and killed by T cells. These antigenic peptides are largely classified into three groups: viral antigens, cancer germline antigens, and mutation-derived neoantigens [1]. Among them, mutation-derived neoantigens have been focused in cancer genomics because the causal role of somatic mutations in cancer have been well-studied. Indeed, the mutation burden of a tumor is known to be correlated with its response to immunotherapy [2]. However, exome analysis–based immunotherapy strategies have limitations, since they can identify only neoantigen candidates occurring at the DNA level [3]. This suggest that a deeper understanding of the generation of neoantigens and better strategies to identify them will be required to improve neoantigen-based immunotherapy.
Recent progress in sequencing technologies has enabled the profiling of RNA processing events caused by various forms of post-transcriptional regulation. In particular, alternative splicing and RNA editing have drawn considerable attention since they promote proteome diversity through changes in amino acid sequences. In addition, the transcript isoforms are easily detectable utilizing conventional RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data if proper computer-based methods are applied. Accordingly, analyses of large-scale RNA-Seq data have shown the genome-wide prevalence and regulation of alternative splicing and RNA editing [4,5]. Data sources such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project have enabled systematic investigations of their association with cancer. Investigators have shown that these RNA processing events are significantly more frequent in cancer samples than in matched normal samples, contributing to antigenic diversity [6,7].
Of note, like somatic mutations, alternative splicing and RNA editing can produce cancer-specific antigens (Fig. 1). Genetic alterations (marked by an orange or pink color in the figure) can occur after transcription. As a result, unlike somatic mutations, RNA-level genomic changes are not preserved in offspring cells. Another noteworthy difference is that the altered transcripts have a wide range of expression levels depending on environmental conditions. Therefore, alternative splicing and RNA editing can be quantified using numerical values ranging from 0% to 100%, indicating the need for user-defined thresholds for modification calling. Recent studies have reported that cancer-specific RNA processing can be a source of immunogenic epitopes [8,9]. In this review, we outline recent work involving the large-scale screening of neoantigens produced by alternative splicing and RNA editing. We also describe analytical strategies to predict and validate neoantigens from RNA-Seq data.