In this study, we compared the performance of risk prediction models combining variable selection and prediction methods. Also, the effect of five SNP sets (i.e., ALL, ASIAN, KARE, ALL + KARE, and ASIAN + KARE) on risk prediction performance was investigated. Overall, we confirmed that prediction models incorporating both demographic variables and genetic variables were more accurate than prediction models using only demographic variables. According to our results, the best combinations were SLR-LASSO and SLR-EN with three set from the KARE SNP set in the KARE testing dataset, whereas the SLR-SLR and SLR-EN combination with one set from the ALL + KARE SNP set outperformed all other combinations in an external replication dataset.
The analysis of risk prediction studies can be extended in several ways. First, the performance of a risk prediction model can be improved by incorporating rare variants. Advances in sequencing technology make it possible to investigate the role of common and rare variants in risk prediction of complex diseases. Wei and Lu [54] proposed a collapsing ROC approach that incorporates genetic information from both common and rare variants. A prediction algorithm based on SVM with common and rare variants was proposed in order to improve predictive performance [55]. Second, integrating biological knowledge into a risk prediction model will provide more accurate predictions and biologically meaningful interpretation. Eleftherohorinou et al. [56] have shown success of a pathway-based prediction test of GWAS data. Recently, a pathway-based approach was proposed to incorporate principal components of pathway effects and pathway-covariate interactions into logistic regression [57]. Furthermore, a risk prediction model can be used to investigate multiple types of omics data, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets. The recent developments of single-molecule sequencing technologies (i.e., third-generation sequencing) has facilitated integrated analysis of multi-omics data. There is no doubt that multi-omics data will lead to improvement of risk prediction models.