In this study, we used statistical methods (SLR, LASSO, and EN) to select variables and build quantitative prediction models. Then, we compared the performance of the quantitative prediction models by each SNP set (ASIAN-100, KOREAN-100, ALL-200, ASIAN-200, KOREAN-200, GWAS-ALL, and GWAS-ASIAN). As a result, the performance of the prediction models using the GWAS catalog and KARE data was better than that of the prediction models using only SNPs reported in the GWAS catalog. For the case that selected variants using LASSO in ASIAN-100 and created a prediction model using SLR, the MSE value was the smallest, 9.64. At this time, the number of SNPs was 51. Also, for the model with the fewest SNPs, we selected variables using SLR from ALL-200 and created a model using SLR. The number of SNPs was 38, and the MSE value was 9.84. Through the 5-fold CV, we developed a quantitative prediction model. After calculating MSE from groups 1 to 5, when assembled with SNPs that were included in all CVs, the resulting values of MSE were small. However, when a different group was used, the MSE value was bigger than when using the covariates to build the model. Therefore, with CV, when using SNPs that match each of their CVs, the efficiency of their quantitative prediction model was high. In the variable selection, SLR performed better than other methods. SLR selected fewer SNPs than the other methods in all SNP sets while providing smaller MSEs. It seems that LASSO and EN tended to select SNPs with little contribution to BMI. For further research, we plan to perform simulation studies and a real-data analysis with other continuous traits.
There are many ways to extend the analysis of quantitative prediction studies. First, along with the application of recently developed methods, such as bootstrapping methods [3435], we will continue to explore new ways to develop more prediction models. Second, the incorporation of rare variants can improve the performance of a quantitative prediction model. Advanced sequencing technology has made it possible to investigate the role of common and rare variants in complex disease risk prediction. Additionally, we can use biological information while choosing the variables. By using single-SNP analysis, we can use gene or pathway information to find useful SNPs [36], and from here, we can assemble an SNP set by adding an SNP list from the pathways related to the disease of interest.