A tumor is a complex ecosystem containing an extensive admixture of different cell types, states, and fates. Tumors begin as a single cell but, during the process of tumor progression, accumulate somatic mutations and diversify to form distinct lineages and subclonal populations. This intratumor heterogeneity, and the clonal evolution that results, plays a critical role in many processes such as immune evasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. This heterogeneity poses a major challenge for genomic analysis by conventional bulk sequencing which typically measures the average signal from an ensemble of cells and is thus a confounding factor in clinical diagnosis and therapeutic treatment of patients.
Understanding genomic alterations at single-cell resolution allows the accurate identification of clonal lineages that favored proliferation despite treatment. To date, most single-cell DNA sequencing (scDNA-Seq) studies of cancer have focused on intratumor heterogeneity and clonal evolution in primary tumors. One of the first studies to use scDNA-Seq to examine aneuploidy evolution in individual cells from triple-negative breast cancer patients found punctuated copy number evolution that was followed by stable clonal expansion [18]. More recently, a study investigated the genomic evolution of single cells in triple-negative breast cancer patients who were treated with chemotherapy and found two distinct subclonal populations that were undergoing extinction and persistence [19].
Among the many single-cell sequencing approaches, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has been the most widely used technique and has been demonstrated to be both accurate and scalable. As a result, scRNA-Seq has already had a great impact on improving our fundamental understanding of intratumor heterogeneity [8, 9, 20, 21], clonal evolution [10, 19, 21], and metastatic dissemination [21] in tumors. Previously, application of scRNA-Seq was limited to the interrogation of features on tumor-associated factors, including tumoral somatic mutation burden, neoantigen load, and PD-L1 expression. Recently, however, scRNA-Seq has been used to interrogate immune-related factors in both tumor cells and microenvironment. In a series of studies, scRNA-Seq was used in combination with tumor spatial heterogeneity analysis to profile the mechanisms of cancer-associated immunosuppression on tumor-infiltrating T-cell dysfunction [22, 23], immunosuppressive tumoral T cells [23], and macrophages [24]. An analysis of melanomas via scRNA-Seq revealed spatial and functional heterogeneity in both the tumor and T cells and further demonstrated the range of T-cell activation, clonal expansion, and exhaustion programs within the tumor [6]. Another study used scRNA-Seq to determine the immune landscape of melanoma patients treated with checkpoint inhibitors and identified two major cell states. One state was similar to that of stem-cell-like memory CD8 T cells and was predominantly found in tumors that responded to treatment, whereas the other state was similar to dysfunctional or exhausted T cells and was commonly seen in resistant tumors [25]. In a further study, scRNA-Seq was applied to map out a high-resolution landscape of immunotherapyresistant melanoma and subsequently discovered a gene expression program that correlated with reduced tumor infiltrating T cells. This study provided a potential approach to predict resistance to immunotherapy before treatment begins, thereby providing a potential target as a means to delay or counter resistance [26].
The discrepancy between mRNA and protein abundance has been frequently reported and even more discordant in the heterogenous tissue of a tumor. Although proteomic studies provide accurate information on the final layer of intratumoral heterogeneity, single-cell proteomics has proven to be more challenging than other single-cell genomic sequencing methods since there is currently no approach to amplify the initial amount of protein. Instead, efforts have been focused on developing methods to more sensitively detect small amounts of protein. Single-cell mass-cytometry (also known as CyTOF) was introduced to tackle this issue with the use of antibody conjugation in combination with MS in order to determine functional properties of cells. In a recent study, this single-cell proteomic method was applied to characterize the functional states of immune cells in melanoma patients before and after anti–PD-1 immunotherapy and found that the frequency of CD14+ CD16− HLA-DRhi monocytes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells could be used as a biomarker to discriminate responders from nonresponders [27].