The rapid development of experimental and analytical techniques has provided various kinds of information on biological components (cell, tissue, disease, gene, protein, drug response, and pathway, etc.) and their functions. Although information on individual biological components has important meaning, biological characteristics result mainly from complex interactions among various biological components [123456]. So, one of the fundamental aims in biology is to understand complex relationships among heterogeneous biological data that contribute to the functions of a living cell. However, finding these interactions among heterogeneous biological data is very difficult due to the complex relationships between them. For example, many disorders are caused by multiple genetic variants, which may affect pleiotropic genes, and are influenced by various environmental factors.
To overcome this hurdle, various approaches have been developed to reveal the fundamental mechanisms that control dynamic cell organization by analyzing biological networks [789]. However, for efficient biological network analyses, traditional relational database systems, such as MySQL and Oracle, may be limited, because traditional relational databases store data in multiple tables and then infer relationships by applying multiple-join statements. Although biological network data can be stored in a traditional relational database, join queries, which connect tables linked by various relationships, become too computationally expensive and complex to design as more complex join operations are performed [10].
A graph database is a database that uses a graph structure. This database uses nodes (biological entities) and edges (relationships) to represent and store data. Each node represents an entity (such as a biological entity), and each edge represents a connection or relationship between two nodes. The key concept of this system is a graph structure (organized by nodes and edges) for connections among the stored data. The graph database is more expressive and significantly simpler than traditional relational databases and other NoSQL databases and is very useful for situations with heavily interconnected data [11]. Especially, the graph database is specialized to represent all of the relationships among large-scale data and is useful for managing deeply linked data. Nowadays, graph databases are widely used in many fields, including computer science and social and technological network analyses.
In the biological community, several researchers have begun to adopt the graph database for biological network analyses. For example, Lysenko et al. [10] showed that the graph database can effectively store and represent disease networks and is a suitable structure to establish for various hypotheses. Henkel et al. [12] showed that the graph database is a useful tool for effectively storing heterogeneous data and establishing various models. Mullen et al. [13] showed that the graph database can find novel usage (that is, drug repositioning) through the traversing of various relationships between a gene and disease. Balaur et al. [14] showed that the graph database is effective in investigating correlation between genetic and epigenetic factors in genetic and epigenetic data of colon cancer.
In this work, we set up a graph database and tested its performance in storing and retrieving heterogeneous and complex biological networks. We used Neo4j (http://neo4j.com/), one of the most frequently used graph databases, and compared its performance with MySQL (https://www.mysql.com/) in diverse situations. We found that Neo4j is superior to MySQL in querying complex relationships among heterogeneous data.