Microbial identification is the key component to microbial community analysis. Considering that most recent data are generated from next-generation sequencing technology, correctly linking the sequences to microbial taxonomic information is fundamental to research in metagenomic studies. Despite the accumulation of genome sequences, 16S rRNA is still the standard for taxonomic identification. This is because current microbial taxonomies based on genomes have a number of limitations, including low phylogenetic resolution and a lack of absolute numbers. Compared with this usefulness, there are only a few public 16S databases available for microbial identification, because it requires a lot of effort to collect and maintain the most up-to-date taxonomic information. Since our knowledge is being constantly expanded through the sequencing of new strains and species, it is not easy to properly organize their taxonomic structure and verify the information in the known phylogeny. Public databases providing taxonomy are as follows: Greengenes (http://greengenes.secondgenome.com), Silva (https://www.arb-silva.de), and EzBioCloud (https://www.ezbiocloud.net); these three are currently being used extensively in amplicon sequencing analysis [1–3]. Greengenes is the most popular and widely used database, since it is the default database in the QIIME pipeline (http://qiime.org/index.html) [4]. It provides Bacterial and Archaeal taxonomy based on phylogenetic trees inferred from chimera-free, consistent multiple sequence alignments, but it has not been updated since May 2013. The Silva database contains taxonomic information for the domains of Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya based on phylogenies. Their taxonomic hierarchy and rank are constructed according to Bergey’s Taxonomic Outlines, List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) and manual curation. The EzBioCloud 16S database provides information on Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya and is mainly designed for species-level identification. It consists of complete taxonomic hierarchy from phylum to species and covers validly published names from LPSN, Candidatus, potential species, and uncultured microbes. The database also contains 16S sequences derived from genome assemblies, which are of higher quality than PCR amplicon sequencing. Among these databases, it is not easy to conclude that one database is superior to others, because each has its advantages and disadvantages. Instead, this study attempts to provide a guideline for which 16S databases are more appropriate in amplicon-based metagenomic analysis. The accuracy of each database was assessed in terms of correctness and diversity using mock community data, wherein the composition of microorganisms is already known.