Introduction to type II transmembrane serine proteases
Dysregulation of proteases is a hallmark of cancer progression; thus, proteases in general have been the subject of numerous cancer studies. Extracellular proteolytic enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and serine proteases, contribute to tumor cell invasion and metastasis through both direct proteolytic activity and the regulation of cellular signaling and functions [17, 18, 19]. Most members of the serine protease family are either secreted or sequestered in cytoplasmic organelles awaiting signal-regulated release. Recently, type II transmembrane serine proteases (TTSPs) have been recognized as a new subfamily of serine proteases that have in common an extracellular proteolytic domain, a single-pass transmembrane domain, a short intracellular domain, and a variable-length stem region containing modular structural domains [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. Enteropeptidase (also known as enterokinase), identified over a century ago due to its pivotal role in food digestion, is the first TTSP, which was revealed by molecular cloning of the enteropeptidase cDNA two decades ago [25]. TMPRSS2, human airway trypsin-like protease (HAT), corin, and matriptase have been subsequently identified as cell surface-associated proteases [23, 24]. To date, 20 TTSPs have been identified in mouse and humans due to the analysis of sequence data from mammalian genome projects [23]. Analysis of the tissue distribution of TTSPs and gene targeting in mice of certain TTSPs suggested that a significant number of TTSPs may have important functions in embryonic development and homeostasis of mammalian tissues, such as heart, skin, inner ear, placenta, and digestive tract [23, 24].
Most TTSPs are overexpressed in a variety of tumors compared to normal tissues, implicating their potential as novel markers of tumor development and progression and possible molecular targets for anti-cancer therapeutics [23, 26]. Recently, a number of works have focused on the evaluation of the expression of individual TTSPs during tumor progression and on the investigation of the potential roles of these proteases in tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion [23, 27].