Human insulin, produced by beta-cells of the pancreatic islets, plays a critical role in the regulation of the metabolism of glucose [1]. Dysfunction of the synthesis or release of insulin may lead to diabetes mellitus [2]. Millions of people suffer from diabetes mellitus worldwide [3], and the most common medication to treat diabetes is insulin; so, a large number of studies on insulin have been done [4]. Insulin is first produced as an inactive protein, called preproinsulin. Preproinsulin, including a signal peptide, is a single, long protein. The chain evolves into proinsulin by cutting out the signal peptide. Then, proinsulin needs to be cleaved into insulin (an A chain and B chain) by removing the C-peptide linking the two chains [5].
Nowadays, recombinant DNA techniques enable us to produce insulin through biochemical processes using Escherichia coli [6]. However, the production of proinsulin by E. coli strains has to several drawbacks, such as low expression, difficulty in solubilizing the inclusion body, short half-life in the host cell, high proteolysis, and inefficient translation of the underlying coding sequences [7]. A new fusion protein system, which fuses an artificial leader peptide to the N-terminus of proinsulin, has been invented as a solution to these problems [8]. The specificity of cleavage and refolding rates are known to be dependent on the sequences of leader peptides, and different kinds of sequences have been proposed [6, 7, 9–11]. Thus, how the sequence of the artificial leader peptide affects the production of proinsulin and its modification into mature insulin needs to be investigated.
In this work, we used several kinds of computational approaches to find a better leader peptide. First, we predicted the three-dimensional structures of fused proinsulins while changing the leader peptides. Although the 3D structure of proinsulin was determined recently [12] and although that of active insulin was determined long ago [13], the structure of fused proinsulin should be analyzed by prediction. Afterwards, the stabilities of the predicted structures were calculated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. MD is a method that simulates the movements of atoms and calculates their potential energies. Finally, the interaction of proinsulins with protease was evaluated by protein-protein docking. By comparing these structural analyses and experiments, we demonstrate that these structural analyses may contribute to determining whether a leader peptide results in efficient production of insulin.