A diagnostic source that would provide high specificity and sensitivity may be of enormous benefit to cancer patients, particularly if the biosource could be obtained from non-invasive materials. It was demonstrated that miRNAs are involved in multiple steps of carcinogenesis, either by oncogenic or tumor suppressor functions [31], and circulating miRNAs exist in the serum or plasma [293233]. More importantly, miRNAs have been detected in human serum and plasma in stable forms because of their short hairpin structures, encapsulation by microvesicles, and association with protein complexes [22233435]. Thus, the detection of any altered expression of tumor-specific miRNAs in saliva, serum, plasma, and urine may offer a promising approach for non-invasive gastric cancer detection.
In this study, the plasma expression levels of three miRNAs (miR-21, miR-27a, and miR-155) were measured in a screening cohort, and we observed that miR-27a expression was significantly elevated in gastric cancer samples compared with healthy control samples. Our result is similar to previously reported results [36]. Next, we investigated whether plasma miR-27a could be released from gastric tumor tissues. We observed that the miR-27a expression level was similar between gastric tumor tissues and plasma, suggesting that the plasma miR-27a expression level may reflect that of the gastric tumor tissues.
miR-27a is located on chromosome 19, and has oncogenic function in gastric adenocarcinoma, by targeting prohibition [16]. This miRNA variant is associated with lymph node metastasis and is overexpressed in gastric cancer [17]. In addition, miR-27a can regulate tumor suppress genes such as SPRY2, and FBW7 [3738]. SPRY2 can inhibit tumor growth and metastases by interfering with Ras/MAPK activation [37], and FBW7 acts as the substrate recognition component of a Skp1-Cul1-F-box-protein ubiquitin ligase that targets numerous oncoproteins for proteasomal degradation [38]. Growing evidence has suggested that miR-27a has an important role in gastric cancer development and progression.
To estimate its potential value for gastric cancer detection, we evaluated the plasma miR-27a expression level in a validation cohort consisting of 35 patients with gastric cancer and 35 healthy control samples. The sensitivity for the validation cohort was estimated as 75% and the specificity as 56%. Current diagnostic tools for gastric cancer, such as the serological markers carbohydrate antigen 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen have low specificity and sensitivity [36]. Our data indicates that the sensitivity and specificity of plasma miR-27a are better than that of the serological markers, although plasma miR-27a alone is not sufficient for accurate gastric cancer detection. Thus, real improvement in the accuracy of gastric cancer detection still needs to be achieved by recruiting additional plasma miRNA markers.
In conclusion, plasma miR-27a could be a useful non-invasive biomarker for gastric cancer detection. Additional studies using a large cohort of samples are needed to validate these results because our study had a small sample size.