The transcription of the Peg3 domain is regulated through at least five promoters: two bidirectional promoters for Peg3/Usp29 and Zim3/Zfp264 and three individual promoters for APeg3, Zim1, and Zim2. Among these promoter regions, three regions are differentially methylated between two alleles; thus they are named differentially methylated regions (DMRs). These include the DMRs of Peg3, Zim2, and Zim3 (Fig. 1). According to previous studies, the PEG3-DMR is a gametic DMR, such that its allele-specific methylation is established during gametogenesis in parents-in this case, the maternal-specific methylation during oogenesis [18]. In contrast, the DMRs of Zim2 and Zim3 are established after fertilization and are thus categorized as somatic DMRs [19]. The promoter of Zim1, on the other hand, is not methylated at all on either allele, whereas the methylation status of the APeg3 promoter is currently unknown. Among the three DMRs, the Peg3-DMR is the most critical for transcription and imprinting of the Peg3 domain. Deletion of part of this DMR causes changes in the transcriptional levels of all genes in this domain [20]. The same mutation also affects the monoallelic expression (imprinting) pattern of two genes, Zfp264 and Zim2: a switch from paternal- to maternal-specific expression for Zfp264 and a change from maternal to biallelic expression for Zim2. These results demonstrate that the Peg3-DMR is an ICR for this domain. It is, however, currently unknown how the Peg3-DMR obtains DNA methylation during oogenesis and how the Peg3-DMR serves as a major cis regulatory region governing the overall transcription of the Peg3 domain.
The 4.0-kb Peg3-DMR can be divided into two small regions: the first 1.5-kb region harbors the bidirectional promoter and the first exon for both Peg3 and Usp29, and the second 2.5-kb region covers the first intron of Peg3. The 2.5-kb intron region displays an unusual tandem repeat sequence structure, and one small motif (GGCGCCATCTT) within these repeats turns out to be a DNA-binding site for the transcription factor YY1 [21, 22]. Since this YY1-binding motif is part of the tandem repeats, multiple YY1 binding sites, 10 sites on average, are easily found within the 2.5-kb region of the Peg3-DMR for any given mammal [23]. A series of studies have been conducted to understand the potential roles for YY1 in the function of the Peg3-DMR. First, according to the results, conditional knockdown of YY1 during oogenesis results in hypomethylation of the Peg3-DMR, suggesting that the protein level of YY1 is very critical for the establishment of DNA methylation in the Peg3-DMR [24]. A similar outcome has also been observed in somatic cells using in vivo and in vitro systems [25, 26]. Thus, YY1 is likely to be involved in setting DNA methylation and also in the maintenance of the Peg3-DMR. Second, the expression of Peg3 is usually up-regulated in response to the reduced levels of YY1 protein. This suggests that YY1 may function as a repressor of the transcription of Peg3 in somatic cells. This outcome is usually accompanied by global changes in the expression levels of other imprinted genes in the Peg3 domain, confirming a major role played by YY1 in the entire Peg3 domain [26]. Collectively, the results obtained so far confirm that YY1 is a major regulator of the Peg3 domain, possibly through the Peg3-DMR.
Along with the five promoters, the 20 ECRs located in the middle 250-kb region are also predicted to be involved in the transcriptional control of the Peg3 domain. To further follow up on this prediction, a series of 3C (chromosome conformation capture) experiments were conducted using various adult tissues harvested from mouse [15]. The results revealed that one of these ECRs interacts with the bidirectional promoter of Peg3/Usp29. This particular one, ECR18, is located 200 kb upstream of the bidirectional promoter, which is actually positioned closer to the bidirectional promoter of Zim3/Zfp264. The interaction is the most prominent in the brain but is also detected in other tissues, such as testis and liver. As described earlier, ECR18 is associated with two histone modifications, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, which mark active enhancers. Subsequent in vitro promoter assays indeed demonstrated that ECR18 functions as an enhancer for the promoter of Peg3/Usp29 in several cell lines tested. The 3C experiments further indicated that ECR18 also interacts with the other promoters of the Peg3 domain. In particular, the bidirectional promoter of Zim3/Zfp264 and the promoter of Zim2 were shown to interact with ECR18 in the testis. Thus, ECR18 might be a shared enhancer for several genes in the Peg3 domain, not just for Peg3 and Usp29.
The transcription and imprinting of the Peg3 domain is likely to be co-regulated through the Peg3-DMR, given the observations described above, such as global changes in the expression levels of the Peg3 domain either by targeting of the Peg3-DMR or by targeting of the transcription factor YY1. This predicted mechanism might be explained in the following manner, which involves ECR18 as a shared enhancer for the Peg3 domain (Fig. 2). On the paternal allele, the Peg3-DMR is unmethylated, and functions as a dominant promoter for both Peg3 and Usp29, thus outcompeting the promoters of the remaining genes, Zim1 and Zim2, for usage of the shared enhancer ECR18. On the maternal allele, the Peg3-DMR is methylated and silent, so that the promoters of Zim1 and Zim2 can access ECR18 for their transcription. This results in the paternal expression of Peg3 and Usp29 and the maternal expression of Zim1 and Zim2. This is particularly true in the brain, as strict imprinting and transcription of these four genes are usually observed in the neonatal brain. On the other hand, the imprinting and transcription of the remaining genes are either bi-allelic or not detectable in the brain; thus, the proposed model is more applicable for explaining the imprinting of the four genes in the brain. This model could explain some of the effects observed from the deletion mutant of the Peg3-DMR, showing bi-allelic expression of Zim2 in carriers inheriting the mutation paternally [20]. Deletion of part of the Peg3-DMR, the 2.5-kb YY1-binding sites, is likely to be responsible for the down-regulation of Peg3 expression and subsequently allows the access of Zim2 to the shared enhancer ECR18 on the paternal allele, resulting in the bi-allelic expression of Zim2. Although reasonable, this model needs to be revised with additional data in the near future in order to explain many aspects of the imprinting and transcription of the Peg3 domain that cannot be explained at the moment.