The role and project of IHEC member institutions
NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Program
The NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Program began in 2008 and has a budget of $200 million. Under the cover of this program, the NIH Common Fund and NIH Institutes and Centers have supported a total of 68 grants in the areas of epigenetic technology development, identification of novel epigenetic marks, reference epigenome mapping, and disease epigenomics investigations. The Reference Epigenomic Mapping Consortium, funded through the Common Fund's Roadmap Epigenomics Program, has been generating genome-wide epigenomic maps for a variety of cell and tissue types. The majority of reference epigenomes that have been generated contains information on epigenetic modifications, including a core set of histone marks, DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, and gene expression information. A subset of reference epigenomes also contains an expanded set of 20 additional histone modifications [5]. Data for 52 complete and partial epigenome datasets for varieties of normal human cells and tissues are available. Epigenomes were mapped on embryonic stem (ES) cells, ES cell derivatives, induced pluripotent stem cells, multiple fetal tissues, several varieties of blood and immune cells, breast cell types, placenta, and solid tissues (e.g., adipose, gastrointestinal tract, skin, and brain). Roadmap Epigenomics plans to complete ~100 additional epigenomes by the end of the program [3, 4].
European Union: BLUEPRINT
The BLUEPRINT consortium, consisting of 41 leading European universities, research institutes, and industry entrepreneurs, was selected for funding in early 2011. The project officially started on October 1, 2011 and will run for 4-5 years. BLUEPRINT has an overall budget of 39.4 million €, for which it receives 30 million € in funding from the European Commission. BLUEPRINT aims to generate at least 100 reference epigenomes on blood lineage (hematopoietic) cells from healthy individuals and on their malignant leukemic counterparts.
The BLUEPRINT reference epigenome will cover the IHEC epigenome set and further expand up to 19 'marks,' called a 'BLUEPRINT set' (including H3K79me3, H3K9/14ac, H4K20me3, H4pan/H4K16ac, H2AZ-ac, H2AZ, p300, and RNA PolII) [4, 6].
Korea National Institute of Health (KNIH) Metabolic Epigenome Project
The project proposal from KNIH, the Center for Genome Sciences, Epigenome Mapping Center (EMC), 5 chronic disease-related hospital, were finally selected for funding during the period of 2012-2013. The project officially started on January 2012 and will run for >5 years. KNIH has an overall budget of $10.9 million for 5 years. Participating clinical institutions were chosen from Samsung Medical Center (heart tissue and cardiomyopathy), Hanyang University Hospital (blood, synoviocyte cell, and rheumatoid arthritis), Asan Medical Center (pancreatic tissue, adipose tissue, T2D, and obesity), and Seoul National University Hospital (kidney tissue and chronic kidney disease). KNIH aims to generate at least 50 reference epigenomes and study them to advance and exploit knowledge of the underlying biological processes and mechanisms in health and disease. KNIH will focus on 50 distinct types of homogenous cells of tissues related to 5 chronic diseases (heart failure, autoimmune diseases, diabetes, obesity, and chronic kidney disease) from normal and disease tissue, mainly obtained by tissue removal or transplantation.
The Korea reference epigenome will entail the analysis of 12 'marks'; an IHEC CORE set: DNAme, H3K4me3, H3K4me1, H3K9me3, H3K27me3, H3K27ac, H3K36me3, RNA-seq, and RNA-chromatin immunoprecipitation (RNA-ChIP), DNaseI hypersensitivity, formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE)-seq, chromatin interaction analysis using paired end tags (CHIA-PET), and miRNA-seq (Tables 2 and 3) [4].
Japan Science and Technology Agency
JST's leading program is the Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST)'s disease epigenome project. In 2011, JST started a research area of "Development of fundamental technologies for diagnosis and therapy based upon epigenome analysis (disease epigenome)." This research area focuses on the IHEC projects and various epigenome analyses related to diseases and stem cells. In 2011-2012, 10 projects were awarded, including 3 IHEC projects. JST' proposal focused the epithelial cells of the digestive system (stomach, colon, and liver), the vascular endothelial cells, and the epigenome in germ cells and reproductive tissue (placental cell, cytotrophoblast, syncytiotrophoblast, endometrial cells, basal layer cells, proliferative functional layer cells, and secretary functional layer cells) (Tables 2 and 3) [4].
The Italian epigenome program
The Italian epigenome program involves two initiatives: the Milan Genomic Initiative (MGI) and the Italian Flagship Project EPIGEN. The MGI was started in 2011 as a joint operation among Istituto Europeo di Oncologia (IEO), Istituto Italiano di Technologia (IIT), and Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare (IFOM) and is located at the IFOM-IEO campus in Milan, a multi-institutional biomedical research area hosting over 500 scientists. The MGI includes 16 independent research-groups in the field of epigenetics. The three institutions are committed to 5-year support of the "Center of Genomic Science" for a total of ~10 million €. EPIGEN was launched by the Italian Ministry of Research and started in January 2012. It includes 25 independent groups. EPIGEN is supported by funding of 30 million € for 4 years. MGI has been a member of IHEC since 2011, and EPIGEN is currently following the required procedures with the Italian Ministry of Research for formal application to IHEC. In parallel, both initiatives are working on a coordination plan with the goal of joint participation to IHEC. MGI expects to provide 50 reference epigenomes, completed to IHEC standards, over the next 5 years, including cells from hematopoietic, mammary, adipose, liver, and neural tissues. Epigen focuses on research projects, such as the role of chromatin structure, DNA methylation, and nuclear architecture in epigenetic regulation and epigenetic control through the noncoding component of the genome: structure and dynamics, epigenetic control of cellular identity and human pathologies, epidrugs for therapeutic use, and plant epigenomics [4].
Germany epigenome project: DEEP
DEEP's funding is approx. 16 million € by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), from 2012 to 2017. DEEP creates an interdisciplinary research platform of 17 subprojects, linking 21 epigenomic mapping and functional analysis groups across Germany. As the German contribution to IHEC, DEEP plans to produce and functionally interpret 70 reference epigenomes of selected human (and some murine) cells and tissues. DEEP will focus on cell types connected to metabolic diseases, such as steatosis (hepatocytes and Kupffer cells) and obesity (adipocytes [small/large, visceral/subcutaneous], monocytes, and macrophages), as well as inflammatory diseases, such as Crohn disease (mucosa, macrophages, and T-memory/effector cells) and rheumatoid arthritis (fibroblasts, macrophages, and T-memory/effector cells) (Tables 2 and 3) [6].
Canada: The Canadian Epigenetics, Environment and Health Research Consortium (CEEHRC)
In 2011, the CIHR established a national collaborative research funding strategy to coordinate epigenetics research in Canada, CEEHRC. The budget of the CEEHRC is $50 million over 7 years. CEEHRC is supporting two EMCs and two Epigenomic Data Coordination Centers (EDCCs), for a total investment of $15 million over 5 years. The CEEHRC-funded EMCs are the Center for Epigenomic Mapping Technologies (CEMT), at the University of British Columbia/BC Cancer Agency, and the Multidimensional Epigenomics Mapping Center at McGill (MEMCM), at McGill University. The funded EDCCs are at Simon Fraser University/BC Cancer Agency and at McGill University. The CEMT group is focusing on a number of cancer and stem cell types, including studies on peripheral and lymphoid B-cells, T-lymphocytes, primitive hematopoietic cells, and patient-derived induced pluoripotent stem cell, as well as thyroid cells and mammary, endometrial, fallopian, and colonic epithelium. The MEMCM group has three initial focus areas: autoimmune and inflammatory disease (using various blood cell types), cardio-metabolic disease (including cardiac and skeletal muscle, liver, adipose tissue, and pancreatic islets), and neuropsychiatric disease (including targeted brain areas in post mortem suicide human tissue, and animal models of hypothalamus/pituitary/adrenal axis dysfunction). In addition, MEMCM specifically addresses population variations in epigenomes within these focus areas. The EMCs together expect to provide 200 reference epigenomes, completed to IHEC standards, over the next 5 years (Tables 2 and 3) [6].