Biological background and data analysis
The expression and genomic SNP profiles of 100 pediatric B-cell ALL patients treated at The Children's Hospital at Westmead were generated using Affymetrix expression microarrays (U133A, U133A 2.0, and U133 Plus 2.0) and Illumina NS12 SNP microarrays, respectively. Each Affymetrix expression microarray has 22,277 attributes, while each Illumina SNP microarray has 13,917 attributes. Each attribute was mapped to a probe of DNA (or a gene), and the value for each attribute corresponded to the expression levels or genotype for the gene (each DNA spot contains picomoles (1012 moles) of a specific DNA sequence, known as probes or reporters). The annotations for each gene were mapped on separate files. Expression microarrays were hybridized with diagnostic bone marrow samples and genomic microarrays were hybridized with remission peripheral blood samples. The patients were treated following the Berlin-Frankfurt-Munich 95 (BFM95) protocol or the complimentary Australian and New Zealand Children's Hematology and Oncology Group Study VIII (Study 8).
Using these datasets, we aimed to develop a predictive model of treatment outcome by identifying genes capable of differentiating patients that survived and those that did not. To achieve this, we applied an attribute deletion approach: identifying and removing genes that were almost certainly not involved in a biological phenomenon and patient comparison. We used the attribute importance ranking that was implemented in 'Random forest' [29] to identify these genes. The remaining informative genes were then used to build a similarity space whereby the distances between patients in this space were indicative of genetic similarity.
The expression values were z-score-normalized within each platform, concatenated, and z-score-normalized to minimize inter- and intra-platform biases. For the genomic SNP profiles, the theta scores were used to represent genotypes. The two datasets were then concatenated, and 30% of all the patients were withheld from the model-building process as a validation set. Eight bootstraps of the validation set's patients were generated, and for each bootstrap, a random forest was performed. Each random forest produced an attribute ranking list, and we combined these eight lists to create a global list of an attribute's importance. The expression and SNP values for the top 250 genes in this global list were used to create a 3D similarity space using singular value decomposition-a matrix decomposition technique [30].