Acute and chronic rejection play critical roles in graft function, and patient survival, following kidney transplantation [17]. Therefore, monitoring for kidney rejection is very important. The standard for monitoring kidney transplant patients is to regularly check serum creatinine levels [2]. Assessment of graft function can be supplemented with a surveillance graft biopsy, but the role of this invasive procedure in monitoring stable, un-sensitized patients is debatable. These methods have drawbacks including low specificity and injury, respectively. Many researchers have tried to develop alternative or supplementary methods for monitoring transplant recipients. One of the promising methods of monitoring for graft rejection is dPCR [91012]. However, it is still not clear whether dPCR is accurate enough to use for the monitoring of the clinical conditions of transplant patients. Thus, in this study, we evaluated noninvasive dPCR based measurement of donor DNA levels in patient plasma and urine as a technique for determining the clinical conditions of kidney transplant patients.
dPCR is a sensitive and cost-effective method to quantify circulating nucleic acids in samples with a high background of homologous sequences [18]. We initially compared three dPCR instruments (QX200, RainDrop, and QuantStudio 3D) using control genomic DNA samples with known genotypes. The Bio-Rad QX200 dPCR system had the best performance coupled with accurate DNA quantification (Fig. 1). The Bio-Rad QX200 droplet digital PCR uses emulsion chemistry to partition 20 µL nucleic acid samples into approximately 20,000 oil-encapsulated nanodroplets to produce data with high sensitivity [19]. On the other hand, the RainDrop and QuantStudio 3D dPCR systems had high false positive rates and inaccurate genotype clustering (Fig. 1). The QX200 dPCR system robustly detected high copy numbers of donor-specific cfDNA within kidney transplant patient urine cfDNA samples, but not plasma cfDNA samples. These results indicate that urine is a reliable source of cfDNA that can be analyzed by dPCR to determine the levels of donor-specific cfDNA following kidney transplantation. The weak detection of donor-derived cfDNA in plasma samples was likely due to the high background of recipient DNA from hematopoietic cells [1620]. Next-generation sequencing methods can be used with plasma DNA samples for transplant monitoring with good performance [8] because next-generation sequencing has better detection power than dPCR [21]. However, next-generation sequencing is difficult and expensive to use in a clinical setting. Preamplification of cfDNA by PCR is another option to enrich the cfDNA isolated from plasma prior to dPCR screening, and this approach has been used in a previous study [10].
Highly polymorphic SNPs can be used to detect donor-specific DNA in transplant recipients. Some researchers have used Y-chromosome markers to identify and measure donor DNA in gender-mismatched transplantations [92122]. Also, many studies have used SNPs to determine the percentage of donor-derived cfDNA with dPCR [10] or next-generation sequencing [8]. In this study, we used highly polymorphic nuclear SNPs that had been used for identifying individuals [13] to detect and measure donor DNA. We evaluated multiple SNPs, including autosomal, sex-specific, and mitochondrial SNPs. Highly polymorphic autosomal SNPs were excellent for identifying donor-specific DNA variants. As shown in Table 1, as few as 24% of the autosomal SNPs used for human identification are needed for donor DNA identification, even in transplants between related individuals. In addition, we confirmed that mtDNA markers are ideal for donor-specific DNA detection in circulating cfDNA, although they cannot be used when transplants occur between family members of the same mitochondrial lineage. Another issue when using mtDNA SNPs as markers in transplantation monitoring is the limited availability of highly polymorphic mitochondrial SNPs, and the high linkage between these SNPs (Table 2). Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 2, the percentage of mtDNA that was donor-derived in urine did not match the percentage of nuclear DNA that was donor-derived. It has been reported that mtDNA concentration is highly affected by the blood-processing protocol [23], and no correlation was also observed between the levels of circulating mtDNA and genomic DNA in previous studies [2425]. Therefore, mtDNA markers may not be better than autosomal SNPs for transplantation monitoring because the donor-derived mtDNA levels in plasma and urine may vary widely between transplant patients, depending on the cell types involved in different pathological conditions. We also found that sex-specific SNPs were as useful as autosomal SNPs to monitor transplanted organ status in cases of gender-mismatched transplantation, particularly when the donors are male (Fig. 2).
In kidney transplantation patients, very limited numbers of donor DNA were detected in plasma, whereas sufficient numbers of donor DNA were detected in urine samples. Therefore, for the detection of donor DNA in kidney transplantation, we think that minimum number of DNA copies is 10 copies and 100 copies for plasma and urine samples, respectively. In this study, we found that urine was a much better source of cfDNA than plasma, because it contained higher copy numbers of DNA. This observation is consistent with previously published findings [92226]. Plasma donor-derived cfDNA levels might also be correlated with the size of grafted organ. Even when stable, liver transplant patients showed higher levels of donor-derived cfDNA than kidney or heart transplantation patients [10]. Because of the limited amount of donor-specific cfDNA in blood, a plasma sample might not be suitable for detecting subtle injuries to the grafted kidney. In contrast, urine contains sufficient amounts of donor-specific cfDNA, even in patients with no abnormal pathology. Perhaps not surprisingly, given the massive tubular network, 2,000–7,000 cells are detached from this system daily and can be collected in urine [27]. Degradation of detached tubular cells could be a source of urinary cfDNA. Our results show that the mean percentage of cfDNA that was donor-specific cfDNA was 53.3% (range, 21% to 92%) in patients with stable graft function and no pathological abnormalities. We can assume that half of the urinary cfDNA originated from the kidney, whereas the other half might be derived from the urinary tract. Our hypothesis was that a damaged or rejected graft would have shown increased excretion of donor-specific cfDNA, and this would be detected in the urine. However, in clinical sample screening, although dPCR accurately detected donor-specific DNA in urine cfDNA samples, we could not find any statistically significant difference between patients with different clinical conditions. The amount of urinary cfDNA was highly variable, even in stable patients, and was not correlated with graft pathology or function. We think that multiple factors, such as patient age, body weight, time after operation, clinical complications, and variability in sample preparation could contribute to the high inter-patient differences in cfDNA levels. Consistent with our results, high inter-patient variation in cfDNA has been also demonstrated in a previous kidney transplantation study [9].
In conclusion, noninvasive monitoring of the levels of donor-specific cfDNA is possible, and is a promising approach to tracking graft status and detecting clinical conditions such as acute rejection. However, due to high inter-patient variation, and the complexity of patient cfDNA samples, accurate prediction of a patient's clinical condition is currently not possible. Therefore, further optimization of donor-derived cfDNA measurement by dPCR is necessary before this technique can be implemented clinically for noninvasive monitoring of kidney transplant recipients.