In the context of bone morphology, the craniofacial region represents the most complex and special part of the body, consisting of 22 separate bones in addition to 22 deciduous and 32 permanent teeth [1]. Most skull bones are developed from neural crest cells, where the skull vault, mandible, and maxilla are formed from intramembranous ossification in the mesenchyme without cartilage. On the other hand, bones from other parts of body are originated from mesoderm and are formed from endochondral ossification. The human face is made from the fusion of 5 prominences (the fronto-nasal prominence and two pairs of maxillary and mandibular prominences), which occur from the 4th to 10th weeks of development, where defects in the process result in many kinds of facial clefts [2].
Studies on human facial morphology can impact various areas, including plastic and dental surgery, facial anatomy, reconstruction, and constitutional diagnosis [3, 4], as well as studies on anthropology and genetics. Of these, the implication of genetic factors on facial morphology has been considered important in understanding hereditary disorders as well as tracing the anthropological origin [5, 6].
Genetic effects on facial measurements have been investigated considerably in the past. Several twin studies evaluated the genetic and non-genetic influence on facial traits [7-10]. One classical twin study showed significant genetic variance of alveolar bone height (h2 = 0.36) using intraclass correlation between twins (MZr = 0.70 and DZr = 0.52) [7]. Another twin study found significant sex differences of genetic variance in anterior face height and no genetic influence on angular measurements [8]. On the other hand, several angle measurements, such as soft-tissue facial angle and Holdaway angle, were shown to have genetic effects [11] in a Turkish Anatolian siblings study.
Family studies, in addition to the twin studies, have reported several key findings regarding the genetic contribution of facial traits [12-17]. In 1991, Kohn [13] found an important role of genetic influence on craniofacial growth. A family study based on ethnically homogeneous Chuvasha pedigrees has found that genetic factors substantially contribute to head shape, where the unadjusted estimates of heritability were found to range from 0.35 to 0.71 [14]. In a recent study using the Hallstatt skull, it was shown that the additive genetic variation accounted for approximately 30% of the phenotypic variation in total facial dimensions (maximum facial breadth, length, and height) [16]. Familial correlation can also be used as an important indicator to grasp genetic and environmental proportions. A morphological characteristics study based on 125 Belgian families has found evidence of genetic determination in longitudinal body measurements and, to a lesser extent, in soft tissues and in nose or mouth regions [12].
There exist a variety of complex indicators for the measurement of facial size and length. A common characterization of facial measurements by reducing the dimension using factor analysis can be very helpful in understanding the genetics behind facial morphology. In recent years, most studies based on this concept assessed 2 common factors: horizontal components (HOCs) and vertical components (VECs). Several investigations found that the genetic effect was estimated differently between 2 factors [8, 10, 14, 18, 19]. In these studies, however, the extraction of common latent variables in facial complex measurements was only limited to HOCs and VECs. In understanding the implication of genetic influence of facial morphology, other characterization methods in addition to the horizontal and vertical component could also be useful.
Although many researchers have studied the genetic effects on facial morphology, most of them have focused on congenital diseases accompanied by facial anomalies. Genetic studies on facial morphology targeting healthy population of various ethnicities are therefore still lagging behind.
The aims of this study were to infer common latent factors by analyzing the pattern found in a factor analysis of 14 facial measurements from the Korean population and investigate the existence of genetic effects for the factors through estimation of familial correlations and heritability.