COX-2 has been reported to promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in osteosarcoma cells. COX-2 gene knockdown by RNAi significantly reduced the cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in SaOS2 cells [11], whereas stable expression of COX-2 increased the ability in U2OS cells [14] (Table 1). These studies demonstrated that abnormal COX-2 overexpression is an important determinant for the malignant phenotype of osteosarcoma cells. By using bioinformatics tools, we here provided useful information to understand the underlying mechanism by which COX-2 promotes the malignant phenotype in osteosarcoma cells.
According to our data, the genes encoding extracellular matrix proteins are highly upregulated by COX-2 (Tables 2 and 4). The genes COL1A1, COL5A2, and FBN1 encode α1 chain of type I collagen, α2 chain of type V collagen, and fibrillin 1, respectively. It has been known that the type I and type V collagens are major extracellular matrix proteins in bone [17]. Although there is a report that type I collagen promotes cell proliferation and migration in gastric cancer cells [18], the causal relationship between the overexpression of those genes and osteosarcoma has not been investigated well. Therefore, further studies are necessary to elucidate whether overexpression of these genes might be involved in the COX-2-mediated malignant phenotype in osteosarcoma.
Extracellular matrix proteins not only are structural components of the connective tissue in the body but also regulate cell fates through their receptors on the cell surface. DDR2 is one of the receptors for collagen, the expression of which was highly upregulated by COX-2 (Tables 2 and 4). DDR2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase, and its overexpression promotes the migration and invasion of cancer cells derived from breast, head and neck, and prostate [19, 20, 21]. Therefore, COX-2 might promote cell proliferation and motility through upregulation of DDR2. Further studies are necessary to elucidate this possibility.
RAC2, a highly upregulated gene by COX-2, is a member of the Rho family of GTPases (Tables 2 and 4). Although there is no report on Rac2 function in osteosarcoma, there is a report that Rac2 GTPase is required for B cell proliferation and survival [22]. Therefore, COX-2 might promote cell proliferation through upregulation of Rac2 function.
Among the highly upregulated genes, RUNX2 encodes a transcription factor governing osteoblast differentiation and skeletal morphogenesis. Recent studies on Runx2 function in cancer are controversial. Runx2 overexpression reduces cell proliferation in osteosarcoma cell lines [23] but promotes cell motility or invasion in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and PC prostate cancer cells [24, 25]. Therefore, further studies are required to elucidate the function of Runx2 in osteosarcoma and the relation between COX-2 and Runx2.
Intriguingly, the genes encoding histone proteins are highly downregulated by COX-2 (Tables 3 and 5). The genes HIST1H1D, HIST1H2AI, HIST1H3H, and HIST1H4C encode histone H1H1, histone H2A1, histone H3A1, and histone H41, respectively. As is well known, the nucleosome is the basic unit of DNA packaging, consisting of a core particle and linker DNA. A core particle comprises 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around a histone octamer (2 copies each of histone H2A, H2B, H3, and H4). The core particles are connected by 10-90 bp of linker DNA, which could be naked or bound to histone H1 [26]. The nucleosome itself has been known to be a general gene repressor [27, 28]. In addition, RNAi-mediated knockdown of H2A.Z reduced cell proliferation in bladder cancer cells [29]. These results are compatible with our finding that COX-2 downregulates the expression of histone genes. Therefore, it is worth studying the mechanism of action of histones in osteosarcoma and the mechanism by which COX-2 downregulates histone genes.
Osteosarcoma is a highly malignant tumor, and the 5-year survival rate is only 20%-30% in patients with macroscopic evidence of metastasis at diagnosis [3]. While the etiology of osteosarcoma has been largely unknown, recent studies have suggested that COX-2 plays a critical role in osteosarcoma development and progression. In this regard, we believe that our study will provide useful information to understand the mechanism of action of COX-2 in osteosarcoma.