In this study, through pathway analysis of MetS, important pathways, including electron carrier activity, signaling by PDGF, MAPKKK cascade, PDGF binding, nucleic acid binding, PPAR signaling, negative regulation of genespecific transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter, non-motor microtubule binding protein, protein secretion, and DNA repair, were identified.
In the previous GWAS using KARE cohorts, rs11066280 and rs2074356 in chromosome 12q24.13, near the chromosome 12 open reading frame, human C12orf51 (C12orf51), and rs12229654 in chromosome 12q24.11, near myosin, light chain 2 (MYL2) were identified to be associated with HDL-cholesterol, hypertension, T2DM, and dyslipidemia [14, 34]. Drinking behavior was also associated with rs11066280 (C12orf51) in Korean men and Han Chinese [34, 35]. In other published GWASs on BMI, important variants on loci near/in FTO, MC4R, and transmembrane protein 18 (TMEM18) were associated with BMI, the latter also having a strong association with BMI in children [36]. Genetic variants in zinc finger protein 259 (ZNF259), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and APOA5 were also associated with MetS [37]. In the GWAS of European Americans and Finnish cohorts, APOC1 was related with dyslipidemia and central obesity, and the gene cluster region in SNP rs964184, near/in gene APOA1/C3/A4/A5, was associated with MetS [3, 38].
Through MAGENTA analysis, pathways related with electron carrier activity and PDGF signaling and binding, as well as PPAR signaling, were identified as some of the top ranking pathways associated with MetS. Electron carrier activity may be related with electron transport activity in the mitochondria. Abnormal regulation of mitochondrial function is associated with factors, such as reduced electron transport chain, which can lead to insulin resistance and MetS [39, 40]. In obese and diabetic patients, fewer and diminished mitochondrial electron transport enzymes, especially complex I, were observed in the skeletal muscle [41, 42, 43]. Defects in the electron transport chain can impair carbohydrate metabolism, affecting the tricarboxylic acid cycle and limiting ATP activity, which could result in lactic acidosis [44]. In addition, mitochondria respiratory chains are major sites of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and excess electrons can increase ROS, stimulating proinflammatory processes and mutagenesis, contributing to mitochondrial dysfunction [40, 45].
Pathways related to PDGF binding and signaling and the MAPKKK cascade were also associated with MetS in this study. The PDGF signaling pathway has been identified to be associated with BMI [29]. PDGF is an important activator of cell proliferation and migration, mediated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, and PDGF signaling regulates angiogenesis [46, 47]. In animal studies, PDGF-mediated pathways played a crucial role in healing myocardial infarction, myocardial fibrosis, and defects in the pathway lead to prolongation of inflammation [48, 49]. In a human study, serum PDGF isoform b levels were lower in individuals with MetS, while increased PDGF expression with elevated urinary PDGF-BB was seen in patients with diabetic nephropathy [50, 51]. MAPK pathways are involved in adipogenesis and metabolic homeostasis, and defects in these pathways due to factors, such as oxidative stress, can lead to abnormal adipose regulation, insulin resistance, and obesity [52, 53]. In addition, increased MAPK signaling had a detrimental effect on β-cell function and insulin homeostasis, which could contribute to the development of MetS [54]. The PPAR isotypes PPAR-α, -δ, and -γ play an important role in lipid and glucose metabolism [55]. PPAR-α is expressed in tissues, including skeletal muscle and liver, regulating lipid metabolism and inflammatory processes, whereas PPAR-δ and PPAR-γ are involved in adipocyte differentiation [56]. Genetic variations in PPAR can affect glucose uptake, fasting glucose levels, and BMI [57, 58, 59]. In a GWAS of T2DM in a Finnish population, variants near PPAR-γ were associated with T2DM [60]. In a Korean study, polymorphisms in PPAR-δ were related with BMI and fasting glucose in non-diabetics [61].
Other pathways related with nucleic acids, such as RNA and DNA, as well as pathways of protein secretion were also associated with MetS. MicroRNAs regulate the action and secretion of insulin, as well as lipid metabolism, playing an important role in the pathogenesis of diabetes, obesity, and cancer [62, 63, 64]. Abnormal expression of microRNAs in pancreatic beta-cells affects beta-cell function and insulin secretion [65]. MicroRNA expression is also related to appetite control in the brain; neural signaling in the muscle, pancreas, and liver; and biological processes of lipid metabolism, which are linked to obesity [65, 66]. In addition, microRNA-33 is an important regulator of lipid metabolism, regulating insulin signaling and fatty acid regulation, and may be a therapeutic target for treating MetS [67]. Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important cause, leading to diabetes [68]. DNA damage in mitochondria and vascular cells can have a detrimental effect on mitochondrial function, increasing ROS production and promoting atherosclerosis [68, 69]. Variations in mitochondrial DNA can also lead to MetS, hyperinsulinemia, and T2DM [70, 71, 72]. In addition, insulin also regulates DNA repair, and a chronic hyperglycemic state can damage DNA, contributing to genomic mutation, which can be associated with cancer [73]. Abnormal protein secretion can affect metabolic traits, proven through studies demonstrating increased secretion of fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4), and frizzled-related protein 4 (SFRP4), associated with obesity, insulin resistance, and abnormal insulin sensitivity [74, 75, 76]. Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4), expressed in adipocytes and liver, showed a positive correlation with MetS in a Chinese population, associated with insulin resistance and dyslipidemia [77, 78].
The exact association between the pathway of non-motor microtubule binding and MetS can not be explained. However, studies have shown non-motor microtubule binding sites to have an important role in mitosis and to be essential in the embryonic development of Drosophila [79]. More studies will be needed to elucidate the association between non-motor microtubule binding and MetS.
One of the strengths of this study is the usage of a pathway-based approach to further analyze the KARE GWAS datasets. Pathway-based approaches of MetS in Asians are relatively scarce. Therefore, this study might help further elucidate the pathophysiology of MetS. Although the pathways identified in our study did not show an FDR value < 0.05, important pathways related with BMI, lipid and glucose metabolism, including signaling by PDGF and PPAR signaling, had an FDR < 0.2. Other pathway-based approaches will be needed to further validate the identified pathways.
Pathway-based analysis has its strengths in improving the interpretability of the GWAS. However, current pathway analysis tools are limited in finding a well-defined pathway, and their isolated characteristics make it hard to combine them with other analyses [80]. In addition, the limited knowledge base and imprecision of gene annotations restricts their usage and integration with other analysis methods [81]. Therefore, these limitations will need to be improved to generalize this approach and increase its applicability.
In conclusion, through pathway analysis of MetS, significant biological pathways associated with lipid and glucose metabolism could be identified, and these results might contribute to the understanding of MetS.