Microbial signatures
Recently, Rivera-Pinto et al. [37] have proposed a new CoDA approach for microbiome analysis that is aimed to the identification of microbial signatures, groups of microbial taxa that are predictive of a phenotype of interest. The identification of microbial signatures involves both modeling and variable selection: modeling the response variable and identifying the smallest number of taxa with the highest prediction or classification accuracy. In order to fulfill the principles of CoDA, instead of analyzing individual abundances, we analyze the relative abundances between two groups of taxa, also referred as the abundance balance between the two groups, a concept that is formally defined as follows:
Let x =(x1,x2,...,xk) be the microbial composition of k taxa and, among these k taxa, let's consider two disjoint subgroups of taxa, group A and group B, with composition abundances denoted by xA and xB, each group with kA and kB different taxa and indexed by IA and IB, respectively. The abundance balance between A and B, denoted by B(A,B), is defined as the log-ratio between the geometric mean abundances of the two groups of taxa as follows:
B ( ğ´ , Â  ğµ ) Â  = Â  ğ¶ Â  âˆ™ Â  ğ‘™ ğ‘œ ğ‘” âˆ ğ‘– âˆˆ ğ¼ ğ´ Â  x i 1 k A âˆ ğ‘— âˆˆ ğ¼ ğµ Â  x i 1 k B
where C is a normalization constant. The larger the values of balance B(A,B), the more abundant is group A with respect to group B. Positive values of B(A,B) arise when group A is more abundant than group B while negative values of B(A,B) correspond to larger abundance of group B relative to group A abundance. A value of B(A,B)=0 correspond to a perfect balance between the abundances of both groups of taxa.
The goal of the proposed algorithm is the identification of the two groups of microbial taxa, group A and group B, whose abundance balance B(A,B) is most associated with an outcome of interest Y. For instance, for a binary outcome Y corresponding to disease status (Y=1 for diesased and Y=0 for not diseased), if we are able to identify the two groups of taxa A and B whose balance is associated with Y we may use B(A,B), the relative abundance between groups A and B, as a microbial signature of disease risk. If large values of B(A,B) are associated with Y=1, we will infer that a person with larger relative abundances of group A with respect to group B will have higher risk of disease than other people with lower relative abundances between A and B.
The algorithm for the selection of microbial balances is implemented in the R package selbal. It starts with a first thorough search of the two taxa whose balance, or log-ratio, is most associated with the response variable. Once the first two-taxon balance is selected, the algorithm performs a forward selection process where, at each step, a new taxon is added to the existing balance such that the specified optimization criterion is improved (area under the receiver operating characteristic or mean squared error). The algorithm stops when there is no additional variable that improves the current optimization parameter or when the maximum number of components to be included in the balance is achieved. This number is established with a cross-validation procedure, which is also used to explore the robustness of the identified balance.