The Declaration consists of five sections and 27 articles and seems to be more relevant to researchers in the fields of genetics and genomics than the other six standards. The aim of this Declaration is to ensure the respect of human dignity and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the collection, processing, use, and storage of human genetic data, human proteomic data, and of the biological samples from which they are derived, in keeping with the requirements of equality, justice, and solidarity, while giving due consideration to freedom of thought and expression, including freedom of research. It is also very relevant today, since the importance of human genetic data for economic and commercial purposes increases and the growing amount of personal data collected makes genuine irretrievability increasingly difficult. The following is the content of the Declaration [6].
This Declaration covers various practical issues: withdrawal of consent; the right to know or right not to know of research results; access to his or her own data; privacy and confidentiality; circulation and international cooperation; sharing of benefits; storage and destruction; and cross-matching.
Article 4 describes that human genetic data have a special status on account of their sensitive nature: they can be predictive of genetic predispositions concerning individuals, and the power of predictability can be stronger than assessed at the time of deriving the data; they may have a significant impact on the family, including offspring, extending over generations, and in some instances on the whole group; they may contain information, the significance of which is not known at the time of the collection of biological samples; and they may have cultural significance for persons or groups. Article 7 requires that every effort should be made to ensure that human genetic data and human proteomic data are not used in a way that leads to discrimination or stigmatization. In this regard, appropriate attention should be paid to the findings of population-based genetic studies and behavioral genetic studies and their interpretations. Article 19 emphasizes the need to share the benefits resulting from the use of human genetic and proteomic data or biological samples collected for medical and scientific research. It describes the various forms of benefits: special assistance to the persons and groups that have taken part in the research; access to medical care; provision of new diagnostics, facilities for new treatments, or drugs stemming from the research; support for health services; capacity-building facilities for research purposes; and development and strengthening of the capacity of developing countries to collect and process human genetic data.