The relation between the expression level and the gene/protein compositional features has been reported in different organisms [5]. However, little is known about the factors affecting the tissue specific gene expression level in multicellular organisms [9]. In the last years, the effects of codon bias and other compositional features on the tissue-specific translational control of genes have been reported [111]. In the current study, in order to elucidate this level of regulation on the expression of apoptosis involved genes, we investigated the relation between the gene expression and structural features. The results can help us understand the molecular mechanism and regulation of this type of genes. Our data suggest that synonymous codon usage in human genes may not be the result of isochore organization of the genome or neutral evolutionary processes as well. We found some common features correlated with gene expression in different tissues, a finding that may indicate common mechanisms in gene regulation. The current results suggest several hypotheses about the mechanisms of gene regulation and tissue differentiation in human.
There are some reports indicating that codon usage in mammals has notable effects on translation rate [14], especially during cell differentiation [15]. The systematic tissue-specific codon usage may indicate that human tissues can differ in the relative tRNA amount [16]. This may influence on the expression of the desired proteins. The significant correlation between gene expression level and some codon frequencies especially AAG codon (truly significant in nine tissues) may indicate the importance of the abundance of attributed tRNAs pairing with this codon. The correlation between gene expression and frequency of AAG codon was interestingly approved in a previous study by Hajjari et al. [11] on Tumor suppressor genes.
Our data can support the Plotkin et al.'s study on synonymous codon usage features [3]. Our data on the significant correlations between tAI and expression levels of genes may support this hypothesis. The relation between synonymous codon usage bias and gene expression levels might be the result of the weak selection on synonymous sites which generate translationally optimal codons [1718]. Among our data, the correlation between the synonymous codon usage of leucin and gene expression level is of noted. In a similar study on tumor suppressor genes, this type of correlation was also observed [11]. So, these data altogether may indicate the importance of synonymous codon usage of Leucine in the structure of genes. Altogether, some correlations between relative synonymous codon usage, codon frequency, tAI, CAI, and gene expression show that there may be a translational selection on apoptosis involved genes. Since some of these features are common between different tissues, we assume that common mechanisms may be involved in some specific tissues in this level of regulation.
Some previous studies declare that the amino acid composition of proteins varies with increasing levels of gene expression in different tissues [192021]. This result might suggest translational selection at the amino acid level. Based on this, the amino acids that are used more frequently in highly expressed genes may correspond to the most abundant tRNAs [1922]. Furthermore, some studies also demonstrate that amino acid composition is affected by selection to decrease the metabolic cost of protein production [23]. In this study, we showed tissue specific correlations between amino acid usage and expression levels of apoptosis genes. Altogether, it may be inferred that the content of amino acids in tissues are very important for the regulation of the expression level of apoptosis involved genes. According to our results, some amino acids have tissue specific correlations with the expression of apoptosis genes. Our results showed that different amino acids including Arg, Asp, Lys, Glu, Gln, Ser, and Ile have significant correlations with the expression level of genes in 15, 14, 12, 11, 11, 9, and 8 tissues respectively (Supplementary Table 5). If we consider all of the codons attributed to one specific amino acid in one group for correlation analysis, we also get the same correlation coefficient and p-value as the amino acid features. So, all of the codons of arginine including CGT, CGA, CGC, CGG, AGA, and AGG (as one group) has the significant correlation with gene expression level. Some previous studies have demonstrated the role of these amino acids in apoptosis progression [2425]. So, it seems that the concentration of these amino acids in specific cell types can play an important role in cell survival and apoptosis.
Altogether, our results demonstrate the potential translational selection on sequence features of human apoptosis genes. Our data support the previous studies performed by Hajjari et al. [11] and Zhou et al. [9] who showed that the expression of cancer involved genes are correlated with compositional features in different human tissues. The current findings have implications for the optimal design of gene therapies targeted in specific tissues and will promote a better biological understanding of translational selection of tissue specific gene expression in human.