Alu elements emerged in the primate genome, approximately 65 million years ago (mya). Since then, they have successfully amplified and diversified in primate genomes. However, their amplification rate has been fluctuated over the time. The majority of Alu elements were inserted in the primate genome ~40 mya and one new Alu insertion occurred in every birth at the time of the most successful amplification [1], which is much higher than an averaged amplification rate, one insertion every 21 new births during the past 60 million years [1012]. Alu elements are divided into different subfamilies according to key diagnostic nucleotides on them. Therefore, Alu elements sharing the diagnostic nucleotides are grouped into the same subfamily. Major Alu lineages are AluJ, AluS, and AluY which are distinguished from each other, based on 18 diagnostic nucleotides on their sequences [6]. Among the three major lineages, AluY lineage is the youngest and AluJ lineage is the oldest. During the long time, AluJ subfamilies have accumulated more random mutations on them and thus their mutation rates are much higher than the younger subfamilies [2].
There are four different models suggested for Alu expansion. The first model is master gene model which well explains how new Alu subfamily is created. It suggests that new Alu subfamily is generated by point mutation(s) of retrotranspositionally hyperactive Alu element. During the primate evolution, the master genes accumulated diagnostic nucleotide changes, leading to different subfamilies at different times. Thus, all Alu subfamilies were derived from a series of sequential master genes which accumulated diagnostic base changes, and all members of an Alu subfamily were propagated from a few master genes representing the subfamily. Because Alu element contains a high content of CpG dinucleotide, point mutation frequently occurs on them. In general, the master genes produce a high number of its progenies (Fig. 2A) [46]. However, some Alu elements have low retrotranspositional activity and their amplification is not well explained by the master gene model. Unlike the master gene model, transposon model suggests that all elements have a similar capability of generating new copies (Fig. 2C). The third model is intermediate model which is literally the intermediate of master gene and transposon models. The third model suggests that there are much more than a few hyperactive Alu elements (Fig. 2B) [413]. Recently, Han et al. [5] introduced the forth model called stealth model. It follows the concept of the master gene model but explains aberrant amplification of Alu elements. Hyperactive Alu elements get mutated and lose its retrotranspositional capability relatively quickly by selection. In contrast, Alu elements with a low retrotransposition activity are able to retain its retrotransposition activity and produce the short-lived hyperactive Alu elements over an extended period of time. It was introduced to explain the recent remarkable expansion of old Alu elements, AluYb lineage, in the human genome (Fig. 2D) [5].