A case epigenomic study based on the ENCODE data
All ENCODE data are freely available for download and analysis. The ENCODE website at the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) genome browser (http://encodeproject.org or http://genome.ucsc.edu/ENCODE) provides information about how to access the data. More than 100 researchers who were not part of the ENCODE project have used the ENCODE data for their studies. We had a question about the conflicts between the openness of transcription factor binding regions and the existence of histones for various modifications. Whereas regulatory DNA elements underlying open chromatin are made accessible by nucleosome-depleted states, the presence of nucleosomes is required for specific histone modifications that mediate the specific regulation of open chromatin regions [30]. To handle this question, we downloaded the data for chromatin accessibility (DHS), in vivo nucleosome occupancy, 15 chromatin states, histone modifications, and transcription factor binding sites for the GM12878 lymphoblastoid cell line from the ENCODE tracks of the UCSC genome browser. We discovered the presence of boundary nucleosomes just inside of open chromatin (black curve in Fig. 1A). In vivo nucleosomes that were reconstituted purely based on naked DNA [21, 31] also peaked right inside of open chromatin (gray shade in Fig. 1A). The corresponding DNA sequences displayed an increase in the C/G dinucleotide frequency (red dots in Fig. 1B) and a significant decrease in the A/T dinucleotide frequency (blue dots in Fig. 1B), exhibiting nucleosome-favoring features. However, there was a difference in the peak position between the in vivo and in vitro nucleosomes, indicating cellular reprogramming of sequence-encoded nucleosome positioning. The similar patterns were found in yeast (data not shown here). This evolutionarily conserved feature provides a platform for histone modifications associated with promoters and enhancers. We examined histone modification levels for the regulatory areas whose borders were occupied by DNA-encoded nucleosomes and those that were free of nucleosome sequences. Among 15 different chromatin states [30], active promoters, poised promoters, and strong enhancers tended to contain nucleosome-encoding sequences. Highest enrichment was found for poised promoters, and the lowest percentage was found with heterochromatin states. All these data indicate intrinsic nucleosome positioning present in the regulatory regions that are frequently accessed or poised for later activation but are not supposed to be silent. As with other ENCODE data users, the main goal of our study was to add a few more new directions to the ENCODE epigenetics road map.