Genetic engineering technology is widely used in the agricultural and plant biotechnology fields, ranging from the food and feed industries to bio-pharmaceuticals and cosmetics [12]. The history of genetically modified (GM) technology began with the discovery of plasmid DNA, where the plasmid could be transferred from one cell to another genome [3]. Scientists subsequently applied the basic plasmid vector system principle and developed recombinant DNA technology to create genetically engineered organisms. Today, GM techniques have been applied to various research fields, including crop sciences, drug manufacturing, and animal husbandry.
The development of transgenic biotechnologies over the last 20 years has led to safety concerns regarding genetically modified organisms (GMOs), particularly in food crops and new pharmaceuticals, which are the most controversial issues. Safety concerns regarding GMOs have resulted in research, debates, and ongoing public unease. Therefore, the European Union (EU) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) in the United States proposed an authorization process in commercial GMO use; however, public apprehension for transgenic techniques remains uncertain and controversial [45678].
Generally, molecular characterization and identification of GMOs are performed using Southern blots and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based detection followed by conventional sequencing methods [7]. However, these approaches are limited to evaluate whether the host genome has unintended sequence substitutions and indels [9]. Moreover, if sufficient genomic information is not available for the chosen comparative model species, it is difficult to detect the correct transgenic insert site location or sequence contamination of vector DNA [910].
Recent publications of GMO molecular characterizations reported the use of next generation sequencing (NGS) approaches as an effective means to detect the precise transgenic insert location [91112]. High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies and bioinformatics can be coupled with NGS to offer new possibilities in drawing genetic maps with feasible costs. For these reasons, researchers have tested new approaches in the molecular characterization of GMOs using NGS technologies [91012].
Here, we examined transgenic insertion sites using paired-end whole genome re-sequencing data following Yang et al. with modifications [9]. Human epidermal growth factor (EGF) was inserted into GM rice cells, which could produce EGF safety without endotoxin derived from bacteria and was used as material for this study. Deep sequencing was performed with the Illumina Hiseq2500 platforms (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). In this pilot study, we demonstrated the potential of NGS for examination of transgenic insertion loci and discuss some technical bottlenecks of this new method.