In metagenomic sequencing of uterine microbiota, Bacteroides and Fusobacterium were identified as uterine pathogens; this finding is in agreement with previous findings obtained by culture-dependent methods [23, 29, 61, 62]. Porphyromonas and Helcococcus have been additionally incriminated as uterine pathogens [20, 23]. Pathogenic bacteria belonging to these genera include F. necrophorum, B. pyogenes, P. levii, and H. ovis. Meanwhile, according to deep sequencing and PCR analyses, the role of E. coli in metritis development is unclear because they were present in extremely low abundance in the uterus and showed no association with metritis [23, 33]. Nonetheless, it is possible that some E. coli are more pathogenic to endometrium of dairy cows, thereby contributing to metritis [57]. For confirmation of association of E. coli with metritis, further evidence is warranted.
Illumina MiSeq platform is the preferred methodology in recent metagenomic studies because it provides deep sequencing and a cost-effective method to identify bacterial community. However, 454 pyrosequencing is also a sequencing option for bacterial community studies when long-read sequencing is desired; Illumina MiSeq platform reads a single or paired end up to 300 bp and 454 pyrosequencing platform reads up to 500 bp. The choice of a sequencing platform can be determined based on sample size and purpose of study as both Illumina sequencing and pyrosequencing provide greater sequencing depth and coverage. As seen in Table 1, similar results are derived from recent metagenomic studies regardless of the chosen or selected sequencing platforms.
However, there are some limitations in metagenomic analysis. First, bacterial viability is unclear because metagenomic sequencing analyzes microbial DNA (e.g., 16S rRNA gene) that can be derived from either dead or live bacteria. Also, metagenomic sequencing provides only relative abundance data, and classification of short-reads of DNA is generally accepted up to the genus level. Therefore, culture and PCR methods are still necessary to complement the metagenomic data. Finally, it is possible that uterine microbiota samples can be contaminated during DNA purification as seen in the case of placenta microbiota which showed difficulty distinguishing microbiota from contamination controls [63]. Thus, negative controls with no DNA, such as reagent and water, need to be analyzed with samples to ensure no DNA contamination.
The study of uterine microbiota in dairy cows will improve our knowledge of uterine diseases in women. Uterine bacteria found in women with puerperal sepsis, pelvic inflammatory disease, or endometrial cancer are similar to those observed in cows with metritis [23, 24, 64–66]. Considering the high prevalence of metritis, availability and accessibility of samples, and the similarity of pathogens that cause uterine disease in cows and humans, we propose that the bovine species is an excellent model by which to explore the role of uterine microbiota in health and disease.
Bacterial community structure is linked to the function of bacterial community. Therefore, metagenomic analysis of uterine microbiota is the first step to understand the role of uterine microbiota in disease and fertility. Currently, we found a specific uterine microbiota associated with metritis, which harbors abundance of Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium. These uterine pathogens were also found in the gut and blood of dairy cows, indicating hematogenous transmission of bacteria towards the uterus [34]. This is supported by the fact that bacteremia was detected in more than ~50% of postpartum dairy cows [67], and that uterine pathogens were found in other body sites causing liver abscess [68, 69] and foot rot [40, 70]. Because uterine pathogens were even present in healthy and non-pregnant cows without causing inflammation [71, 72], it is possible that uterine pathogens are normal residents of the bovine uterus, and uterine disease may develop in postpartum cows with high abundance of uterine pathogens by alteration of uterine microbiota. Therefore, modulating uterine microbiota towards limiting abundance of uterine pathogens and improving diversity of uterine microbiota may be necessary for uterine health and fertility.