In recent years, a significant advance of technology has been achieved in both genotyping and computing fields, which has enabled us to perform large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) [1, 2]. GWASs have provided enormous potential in identifying genetic variants for common complex diseases. By GWASs, researchers have discovered many genetic variants that affect common complex traits, such as height, type 2 diabetes, and blood pressure [3-5].
In particular, the nature of obesity is related with many chronic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancers [6-8]. In addition, it has been found that obesity may be caused by multiple genes, environmental factors, and those interactions [9-11].
In order to identify the genes associated with obesity, body mass index (BMI) has been commonly used as an obesity-related phenotype or trait in GWASs. Many studies have reported that the genetic variants in FTO are associated with BMI [12, 13]. Most of these studies have used the single single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) approach, in which each single susceptible locus is searched in association with obesity. The single SNP approach has long been used in detecting genetic traits, and it is especially optimal for Mendelian traits. However, complex traits are well known to be caused by multiple genetic factors as well as several environmental factors and their interactions. Thus, the single SNP approach is not appropriate for detecting multiple genetic factors affecting common complex polygenic traits.
For the identification of multiple and joint genetic factors associated with complex traits, the multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method has been proposed by Ritchie et al. [14] and applied in detecting gene-gene (GxG) interactions [15, 16]. However, their approach can be applied only to binary traits, and the covariates that may affect the phenotype can not be adjusted. In order to overcome these drawbacks, generalized MDR (GMDR) analysis was proposed by Lou et al. [17], in which both binary and quantitative traits can be considered phenotypes while adjusting for covariates.
Although MDR and GMDR have been widely used to detect GxG interactions in genetic association studies, their applications have been mainly involved in dealing with candidate genes or a small set of genes. Since enormous computational complexity and high-speed computing resources are required in GWASs, neither MDR nor GMDR has been successfully applied to GWASs. In order to overcome these computational limitations, we previously proposed an efficient stepwise approach to identify GxG interactions for GWAS data [18] using cuGWAM, a graphic processing units (GPU)-based MDR program [19].
However, it still remains a challenge to have a biological interpretation of the identified GxG interactions. In order to elucidate the identified GxG interactions, we propose a network graph analysis. Our network analysis method focuses not only on the biological meaning but also on the strength of interaction.
We applied our network graph approach to Korean Association Resource (KARE) data for GxG interactions and its interpretation. We first performed GMDR analysis for BMI. Using our network graph analysis, we then identified several GxG interactions having reasonable biological interpretation from the network graph using public biological resources.