The breakthrough in next-generation sequencing (NGS) techniques has enabled rapid sequencing of whole genomes at low cost and has brought tremendous opportunities as well as challenges to biomedical research [1-5]. The cost of sequencing is projected to continue to drop, with whole-genome sequencing expected to be as low as $1000 [4] and whole-exome sequencing (i.e., sequencing approximately 1% of the coding regions of the genome [6]) to be $500 [1]. Such low costs enable a small research lab to generate large amounts of sequence data in a short period of time on a relatively small budget. The low cost also allows sequencing-based clinical genetic tests to be routinely performed to provide guidance for health professionals for disease etiology and management. The challenge now is how to reliably synthesize and interpret this large amount of raw data from sequencing platforms.
One goal of genomic research is to determine which genes are causal for the disease of interest. With the NGS data, this is not a trivial task. Large-scale whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing analyses identify large amounts of genomic variants, most of which are not related to disease risk. Thus, disease gene prioritization principles and tools are needed [2] to identify and prioritize variants of interest from the large pool of candidates. Currently, identifying candidate causal mutations/genes is often a complex practice that involves several dozens of steps and/or tools to accomplish. These tools work jointly in a series of steps and thus functionally form a "workflow" or a "pipeline." Ideally, the process of disease gene prioritization generates an ordered list of genes that puts high-risk candidates on the top of the stack and filters out "benign" or neutral variants. In reality, this process usually involves multiple filtering steps, some of which have underlying assumptions that can affect how variants are filtered.
The focus of this review is to provide a broad overview of the workflow and present some of the bioinformatics software tools that are currently available. More in-depth comparisons of the bioinformatics algorithms and tools are described elsewhere [3, 5].