Sauropsids (birds and reptiles) number around 20,000 species, comprising large group diversity in birds (9,900 species) and squamate reptiles (9,700 species), but small diversity in turtles (340 species) and crocodilians (25 species) [2]. It is possible that the species richness of birds and squamate reptiles correlates with the large karyotype variability. By contrast, turtles and crocodiles show low chromosome constitution variability, although the correlation between chromosome changing rate and species number is found in turtles, but not in crocodiles [20282930]. This probably results from the role of sex chromosomes as all crocodilians exhibit temperature sex determination, but both genetic sex determination (homomorphic and heteromorphic sex chromosomes) and temperature sex determination are found in other sauropsids (except for tuatara), leading to high speciation rate and species diversification [31].
The crocodilian karyotype contains few large and many small chromosomes, and there is an absence of dot-shaped microchromosomes [1920]. On the contrary, the karyotypes of most squamate reptiles, tuatara, turtles, and birds contain macro- and microchromosomes [20]. Many chromosomal rearrangements might, therefore, be the result of the appearance or disappearance of microchromosomes, which reduced whole-chromosome homology among sauropsid chromosomes. The draft genome assemblies of chicken (Gallus gallus), Anolis lizard (Anolis carolinensis), Chinese alligator (Alligator sinensis), American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis), saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus), Indian gharial (G. gangeticus), Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus), and king cobra (Ophiophagus hannah) provided new perspectives on the comparative genomics of Sauropsida, which in turn facilitated extensive comparisons between genomic structures at a molecular level [323334353637]. Recent comparative gene mapping of several sauropsid species (Pelodiscus sinensis, Testudines; Crocodylus siamensis, Crocodilia; Gekko hokouenesis, Lacerta agilis, Elaphe quadrivirgata, Varanus salvator macromaculatus, Leiolepis reevesii rubritaeniata, Pogona vitticeps, and A. carolinensis, Squamata) with those of chicken revealed the extensive homology between avian and reptilian chromosomes, and suggested that the common ancestor of amniotes may have had many microchromosomes, whose linkages have been conserved among chickens and reptiles [252633, 38394041424344]. Comparison of the linkage homology between Archosauromorph and turtle chromosomes revealed that the macro- and microchromosomes of turtles are true counterparts of those of chicken [2526]. However, the comparative cytogenetic map of the Siamese crocodile (C. siamensis), i.e., the first cytogenetic map in the crocodilian lineage, revealed that genetic linkages of large chromosomes were also conserved in blocks on chromosome arms that corresponded to chicken macrochromosomal arms and/or entire macrochromosomes. The five largest bi-armed chromosomes of crocodile are derived by combinations of chromosome arms that differ from the chicken karyotype, while chicken microchromosomal genes are all localized to small chromosomes of the crocodile. This suggested that the Siamese crocodile karyotype resulted from two events that occurred in the crocodilian lineage: (1) centric fissions of bi-armed macrochromosomes in the ancestral Archosauromorph-turtle karyotype, followed by centric fusions between acrocentric macrochromosomes (new combination), leading to large chromosomes in crocodilians, and (2) repeated fusions of microchromosomes, which resulted in their disappearance and the appearance of a large number of small chromosomes [26].
Notably, chromosome size-dependent genomic compartmentalization is often found in birds and turtles but not in squamate reptiles, such as microchromosome-specific centromere repetitive sequences [4546474849505152]. This implied that the homogenization of centromeric repetitive sequences between macro- and microchromosomes did not predominantly occur in birds and turtles. However, no chromosome sized-specific centromeric repetitive sequences are found in crocodiles [21]. This suggested that chromosomal size-dependent genomic compartmentalization which is supposedly unique to Archosauromorph and turtles was probably lost with the disappearance of microchromosomes, followed by the homogenization of centromeric repetitive sequences among chromosomes in the crocodilian lineage after their divergence from birds around 240 MYA.