TSD serves as a common landmark of unity on transposition mechanisms for both dTEs and rTEs. The only exception so far is the Helitron superfamily, which lacks TSD and employs a rolling circle replication model. As long as a TSD is generated during TE integration into the host chromosome, it indicates that the immediate intermediate of integration is in a double-stranded DNA form, regardless of RNA or single-stranded DNA being the initial intermediate.
From the EM pictures of FBI and rigid rod configurations of native DNA (Fig. 3), an ideal configuration of a transpososome may be envisioned. It becomes apparent that vertical insertion of the DSB ends of the TE in an intercoil alignment is probably the best-fitting mechanism of DNA transposition. Small sizes of the target, around 6-7 bp, encountered in TSD as well as in attP and attB in site-specific insertion all point to the fact that they correspond to the diameter of FBI DNA 2.2 nm.
The transpososome, made of FBI DNA configurations of the TE and the enhancer element, may effectively abolish lingering mechanistic puzzles about keeping four broken strands of the TE and the host from flying apart and answer how a TE molecule jumps onto a new target site at a distance. Replicative transposition is explained likewise, even utilizing the terminal homology as a possible origin of replication. It would be, however, difficult, if not impossible, to reproduce such a transpososome complex in vitro by FBI DNA configuration, which is critically needed for EM observations and crystallography analysis.
There are four main modes of transactions by which the FBI DNA motif may be utilized in DNA functions in the cell: alpha deletion, omega inversion, needle point site-specific insertion, and NHEJ-GF integration of TE [8]. With such an abundant presence in strategically important positions in the genome and very dynamic functional roles, it is hoped that FBI DNA receives the proper recognition and interpretation for a better understanding of the life process.