Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have successfully identified susceptibility variants associated with human diseases. However, most susceptibility variants have small effect sizes and explain only a small proportion of heritability [1]. The presence of a large number of variants genotyped for a small number of subjects (commonly known as “large p small n”) has been one major challenge in building disease risk prediction models. Furthermore, the issue of multicollinearity arises when there is high linkage disequilibrium (LD) among single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Multiple regression is very unstable and sensitive due to multicollinearity, in which the coefficient estimates have very large variances [2]. Recently, various statistical approaches have been proposed to cope with these issues.
Traditional approaches for disease risk prediction have been based on gene scores (GSs) [3456]. The marginal effects of previously known disease-associated loci are estimated, and then, their sum can be used to construct a risk prediction model. While GS-based approaches can be useful when a genetic variant is responsible for diseases [7], they show low prediction performance when multiple genetic variants exist for a complex disease [89]. For example, the prediction performance for coronary heart and disease type 2 diabetes (T2D) is only 0.59 and 0.58, respectively, for area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) values [89].
For complex diseases, a more accurate and reliable prediction model is required. Multiple logistic regression (MLR) is a classification method that utilizes combined information across multiple genetic variants. Several studies have shown that the MLR-based approach is useful in building a disease risk prediction model [10111213]. However, if there is large LD between SNPs, the parameter estimates of MLR become unstable, and as a result, the risk prediction model has weak predictive power.
As an alternative to MLR, data mining approaches have been used widely to improve risk prediction performance. In particular, support vector machine (SVM) [1415] and random forest [1617] have been shown to outperform other classification algorithms [18]. Although these data mining approaches may provide very useful tools in classification, the effects of genetic variants on a disease in prediction models are not easy to interpret. Furthermore, these approaches do not give class conditional probabilities of individual predictions [19]. Thus, we focus mainly on penalized regression approaches in this paper, which provides an individual prediction result in terms of probability.
As mentioned before, the problem of “large p small n” interrupts the estimation of the joint effect of multiple genetic variants. In order to overcome this, various penalized regression approaches have been proposed, such as ridge [202122], least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) [23], and Elastic-Net (EN) [24]. These penalized approaches have an advantage in terms of both variable selection and prediction power over non-penalized approaches for high-dimensional data. For instance, the prediction performance for Crohn disease and inflammatory bowel disease using a number of genetic variants with penalized approaches has been shown to improve [2526].
In this study, we investigated the effect of variable selection on the performance of prediction methods. Especially, we considered the following methods for variable selection and prediction: stepwise logistic regression (SLR), LASSO, and EN. We compared the effect of variable selection on the performance of prediction by applying them to T2D GWAS chip data. We constructed the prediction models by combining variable selection and prediction methods using the Korean Association Resource (KARE) GWAS dataset (3,180 individuals) and then evaluated the performance of the risk prediction model through both internal validation (805 individuals in the KARE testing dataset) and external validation (4,723 individuals in an external replication dataset). The external replication dataset combined two cohorts: the Health2 study (1,816 individuals) and Health Examinee (HEXA) study (3,696 individuals). In both the internal and external validation datasets, we measured the discriminative accuracy of the prediction models using AUC.