At the organismal level, mammalian imprinted genes usually have similar functions, controlling fetal growth rates and nurturing behaviors [27, 28]. This is likely the case for the imprinted genes located within the Peg3 domain, based on the following lines of evidence. First, most genes in the Peg3 domain are expressed in early embryogenesis and the brain. The expression levels of Peg3 and Zim1 are very high in embryos and placenta [5, 11]. In brain, Peg3, Zim1, Zim2, and APeg3 are all expressed in the hypothalamus [29, 30], which is known to be involved in controlling maternal-caring behaviors and milk provision [31]. Second, mutations in the Peg3 locus tend to have two consistent phenotypic effects [29, 32]. The pups with mutant alleles have defects in milk-suckling behaviors. As a consequence, the carriers become progressively weaker than their littermates due to the insufficient uptake of milk, which quite often results in perinatal lethality. The adult mice of both genders also have various reproductive and behavioral problems [32,33,34]. Mutant females produce a relatively small number of mature eggs, resulting in reduced litter sizes. Also, pregnant females have problems in milk letdown and in maternal-caring behaviors, thus causing the perinatal lethality observed among wild-type pups. It is interesting to point out that Peg3 mutations have effects on a set of paired behaviors between the mothers and their pups for milk provision, milk suckling, and letdown. This has been a basis for the 'co-adaptation' theory of mammalian genomic imprinting [35]. In the case of bovine Usp29, a mutation deleting a 100-kb interval within the middle 250-kb region has been shown to be responsible for the stillbirth of calves [36]. The exact mechanism by which this deletion causes stillbirth is currently unknown, but this mutational effect is overall consistent with the phenotypes that have been observed from the Peg3 domain, controlling the growth and development of the fetus during the gestational period.
At the cellular level, the predicted functions of Peg3 are worthwhile to be discussed. Peg3 is a potential tumor suppressor, given the observation that many human patients with ovarian and breast cancers lose the expression of PEG3 due to DNA hypermethylation on the PEG3-DMR [37,38,39]. This was further demonstrated by in vitro studies in which reintroduction of human PEG3 into primary cell lines derived from ovarian cancer patients resulted in the inhibition of cell growth [39]. According to recent data from in vitro studies, Peg3 also appears to be involved in autophagy in endothelial cells [40]. Soluble forms of several structural proteins, including decorin, are shown to trigger autophagy in endothelial cells as part of the apoptotic pathways that are designed to remove stressed and damaged cells. Interestingly, PEG3 has been found to play a major role in conveying this external signal through vesicular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) to induce the transcription of two core components, BECLIN1 and LC3, for autophagosomes. The potential roles of Peg3 in autophagy are particularly intriguing, since Peg3 is predicted to play important roles in the placenta, where autophagy is critical for the constant turnover of protein and other nutritional materials [41]. It is also relevant to note that nutritional starvation of pregnant females causes changes in the expression levels of a subset of mammalian genes. Interestingly, the majority of these genes is also affected by mutations on Peg3, suggesting that these genes are likely either direct or indirect downstream genes of Peg3 [41]. Thus, Peg3 may be a major player in controlling in nutritional supply between females and pups during pregnancy. Since autophagy is regarded as a part of apoptotic pathways, the potential roles for Peg3 in autophagy are also consistent with previous observations hinting at the functions of Peg3 in apoptosis. These include up-regulation of Peg3 during p53-mediated apoptosis, muscle cachexia (or wasting) in response to tumor load, and induction of Peg3 in response to hypoxic conditions [42,43,44]. Taken together, these results support the idea that Peg3 is a tumor suppressor with a potential connection to autophagy.
At the molecular level, the imprinted genes in the Peg3 domain code for two different types of proteins: a ubiquitin-specific protease for Usp29 and zinc finger proteins for Peg3, Zim1, Zim2, Zim3, and Zfp264. According to recent studies, USP29 might also be a tumor suppressor, given the observation that USP29 is required for the stability of Claspin, a key protein for the DNA damage checkpoint [45]. This is quite intriguing, since DNA hypermethylation of the PEG3-DMR has always been regarded as an epigenetic abnormality affecting the expression of PEG3 but not USP29, although the PEG3-DMR controls both genes. Thus, it would be interesting to test whether the outcome of this DNA hypermethylation manifests as down-regulation of PEG3 only or PEG3 and USP29 together. Among the four zinc finger proteins within the Peg3 domain, Peg3 is the only gene that has been studied so far at the protein level. According to recent studies, PEG3 binds to many genomic loci as a DNA-binding protein with transcriptional repression activity [46]. It is well known that many zinc finger proteins, including those in the Peg3 domain, repress their downstream genes through interaction with KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP-1) and SET domain-containing histone methylase at H3K9 (SETDB1) [47, 48]. Thus, we predict that PEG3 may also repress its downstream genes through SETDB1/KAP-1-driven H3K9me3. According to recent studies, several placenta-specific gene families are de-repressed in mouse embryos with the Peg3-null mutant allele; yet, these gene families are usually repressed through H3K9me3-mediated mechanisms [49, 50]. Thus, this result again supports the idea that PEG3 controls its downstream genes through H3K9me3-mediated mechanisms.
At the molecular level, several genes within the Peg3 domain are also predicted to function as ncRNA genes (Fig. 1). Among these genes, APeg3 is quite unique as an RNA gene due to the following reasons. First, it is well conserved among all mammals [51]. Second, it is an antisense transcript gene localized in the 3'-UTR of another proteincoding gene-in this case, Peg3 [12]. Third, APeg3 is expressed only in the hypothalamus but highly up-regulated in response to osmotic challenge [30]. Given these special circumstances, it has been predicted that APeg3 may be designed to control the expression of Peg3. Consistent with this prediction, in vitro studies demonstrated that APeg3 has the potential to down-regulate the mRNA and protein levels of Peg3 [51]. Although the mechanistic basis for the observed down-regulation needs to be investigated further, the in vivo functions of APeg3 are most likely connected to those of Peg3.