Breast cancer is known to one of the leading causes of cancer death among females [1]. A massive number of research studies on the genomic characterization of breast cancer, particularly the discovery of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), have revealed clinically relevant molecular subtypes [2], which has increased the accuracy of the prognosis [3–5] and has resulted in successful targeted therapy [6, 7]. During recent decades, resources based on high-throughput sequencing technologies, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [8] and International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) [9], have facilitated more accurate detection of DEGs and cancer driver genes. The identification of DEGs is prominent, in that it leads to more accurate subtyping and more precise treatment for various types of cancers.
In transcriptome analysis based on microarray [10] or RNA sequencing [11] by next-generation sequencing, DEGs are usually identified by statistical tests, such as t test, nonparametric test, and Bayesian models [12]. Subsequent analysis of pathways and functional enrichment tests for DEGs are performed to increase the understanding of molecular mechanisms [13].
In the case of breast cancer, it is well known that molecular subtype and patient age are strongly associated with clinical features, such as survival rate. Fredholm et al. [14] reported that the 5-year survival rate was lowest in the of 25–34-year-old age group and decreased with increasing age. Likewise, Gnerlich et al. [15] reported that younger women were more likely to die from breast cancer than older ones, based on the statistics of 243,012 breast cancer patients. Recently, Azim et al. [16] studied genomic aberrations in young and elderly breast cancer patients based on TCGA data. They found that older patients had more somatic mutations and copy number variations (CNVs) and that 11 mutations and two CNVs were independently associated with age at diagnosis.
In this work, we aimed to classify human genes based on age-specific differential expression between normal and breast cancer cells. DEGs were identified based on their p-values for differential gene expression between tumor and matched normal cells. DEGs and non-DEGs were then classified based on age-specific differential expression by the three age groups we defined. To show an application of the classification, we compared the accuracy of prediction models that distinguish normal and tumor cells, constructed by support vector machine (SVM) using various combinations of genes by class. The performance of SVM was measured by the average area under the receiver operating characteristics curve value after 1,000 times bootstrap.