The slew of epigenetic data has revolutionized our perception of the human genome. Although not all "epigenetically marked" regions of the genome are likely to be functional, it is very likely that a large portion is functional-much more than the 5-10% of the genome that is deemed to evolve under purifying selection [84, 85]. Analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic data has revealed that almost half of the genome is involved in carrying out specific biochemical functions [13]. Where these biochemical functions fit in the big picture, and how they are regulated are still open questions.
Another fundamental problem is that the causal relationships among various epigenomic events, such as DNA methylation, histone modifications, TF binding, and gene expression, etc., are currently not well understood. Although correlations between these events have been well documented in different contexts, we do not know if one is necessary and/or sufficient to observe another.
Before the full potential of NGS in mapping the epigenome can be attained, several technical challenges need to be overcome. For instance, techniques like ChIP-seq, used for profiling transcription factor binding and histone modifications require a large amount of starting material, ranging up to 5 million cells. Collection of such a large population of primary differentiated cells, progenitors, and those from specific developmental stages is inherently hard. Heterogeneity of a cell population is another issue that needs to be resolved. It is challenging to obtain a homogeneous population of cells of a singular type from primary tissues that often contain a heterogeneous population of cell types, and it is this lack of homogeneity that can adversely impact the interpretability and generalizability of the results obtained from analyzing the epigenomic data.
Yet, many solutions to tackle the problems above are underway. First, there is the emergence of techniques-like ChIP-nano (nano-scale ChIP), which is a highly sensitive small-scale ChIP-seq protocol with a requirement of <50,000 cells as starting material [86], and single-molecule real-time sequencing [87], which aims at alleviating cell-population effects during mapping specific features. Second, methods that are aimed at the targeted knock-out of epigenetic modifiers, like DNA methyltransferases and histone modification enzymes, at predetermined DNA sequences (using transcription activator-like effector nucleases [TALENs]) [88], can help to better characterize the functional relationships between gene expression and epigenetics, thus providing proof of concept for expression modulation (also called epigenetic editing methods) [89]. Also, powerful statistical approaches are being developed to integrate data [42, 90] to resolve some of these fundamental issues. With more epigenomic maps being profiled, and more effective computational approaches being developed, we are inching towards a holistic mechanistic understanding of cellular and organismal processes.