Previous studies using the whole-genome estimation approach have shown that common SNPs explicate a large proportion of heritability for traits in human [1012]. The reason why GWASs in this field have not yet identified all common SNPs that contain information on the amount of variation is mainly that many peculiar effects are too small to pass the stringent genome-wide significance level. Therefore, we hypothesized that inheritance of Korean Holstein milk production traits would consist of a lot of genetic variants with small effects. Finally, we estimated and partitioned the genetic variance that met certain conditions, tagged by all common SNPs for three complex traits related to milk production and showing ubiquitous polygenic inheritance of Korean Holstein. The estimates of h2G for three traits were different from 0 at the significance level (p<0.1). The estimate of h2G for milk yield of parity 1 was 43.0% (SE = 10.3%), which was smaller than the estimate from a study in Canada (h2G = 52%) [13]. There could be three possible reasons: (1) There is a difference in the reference population size between Korea and Canada. In fact, Koreans import a lot of Canada Holstein semen, but the present reference population is smaller than Canada. (2) The Korean environment is different from Canada. (3) We can consider only one environmental effect (season) due to data size in this study. The estimate for milk fat (h2G = 47.0%, SE = 10.1%) and protein (h2G = 44.3%, SE = 10.2%) in Korea was larger than in Canada (fat h2G = 36.9%, protein h2G = 42.3%).
It is demonstrated by the genome partitioning analysis that there was a significant linear relationship between the estimates of variance explained by individual chromosomes and chromosome length (Fig. 2). If we define the genic region as ±0 kb of the UTRs, the correlation between variance explained and chromosome length was stronger in the intergenic regions than in the genic regions (Fig. 3). A previous study showed by a number of analyses that the result in this was driven neither by the difference between the number of SNPs in genic regions and in intergenic regions nor by the difference in MAF distribution between genic and intergenic SNPs [7]. If trait-associated genetic variants are enriched in functional elements, such as introns and UTRs, and diluted in exons, the relationship between the explained variance and DNA length will be attenuated in the genic region, as in human. However, it could possibly be just a sampling problem. Because our data size was smaller than our expectancy, some chromosomes did not reach the significance level (p = 0.01) in the genome partitioning analysis. In the genome partitioning analysis for milk yield using SNPs in the intergenic region and milk protein using SNPs in the genic region, the linear regression results were also insignificant, and we could identify some outliers. Moreover, when these outliers were removed, the linear regression results were significant (E in Fig. 3). We hypothesize that some chromosomes could have a slightly larger effect than our expectation, based on the fitted line in special cases (chromosome 17 or 4 in milk protein).
We showed by whole-genome estimation and partitioning analyses that Holstein milk production traits appeared to be highly polygenic, which means that there were a large number of genetic variants segregating in the population with a small effect widely distributed across the whole genome. All common SNPs expressed most of the heritability on average over all 3 traits analyzed in this study. The slight, remaining unexplained heritability could be due to causal variants, including common and rare ones that are not well tagged by SNPs on this Illumina SNP chip, or possibly because the heritability was over-estimated in the pedigree study. In conclusion, heritability consists of many variants with small effects for Holstein milk production traits in Korea. Overall, this research will become a cornerstone for genomic selection applications in animal breeding.