BioNLP Open Shared Task: AGAC track
To encourage cross-disciplinary collaboration from various drug-related knowledge discoveries, shared tasks have long been a stage to gather researchers with different backgrounds, e.g., the series of BioNLP Shared Task (BioNLP-ST) workshops [67-71].
Aiming to gather text mining approaches among the BioNLP community to propel drug-oriented knowledge discovery, BioNLP Open Shared Task workshop (https://2019.bionlp-ost.org/tasks) proposed five sub-tasks (tracks). Among the five tasks, we propose a AGAC track (https://sites.google.com/view/bionlp-ost19-agac-track), for the goal of drug repurposing.
AGAC track provides an AGAC and aims to extract mutation-disease knowledge from PubMed. The mutation-disease knowledge in this track links gene-mutation-function change to disease, which not only contains the relationship between mutation and disease, but also indicates the functional change of the mutation, i.e., GOF or LOF. One application of this track is to elevate the efficiency of drug discovery, since matching drugs with their target mutated genes must consider the corresponding of the function change of mutated gene and the pharmacological activities of drugs.
AGAC track contains three different tasks.
(1) Trigger words NER: This task requires participants to recognize trigger words from PubMed abstracts, and annotate them with their corresponding AGAC labels or entities (Var, MPA, Interaction, Pathway, CPA, Reg, PosReg, NegReg, Disease, Gene, Protein, and Enzyme).
(2) Themetic roles identiftcation: Identification of AGAC themetic roles (e.g., Theme Of, Cause Of), between trigger words.
(3) Gene-function mutation-disease link discovery: Extract the gene-(mutation)-function change-biology function or disease link. For example, “Mutations in SHP-2 phosphatase that cause hyperactivation of its catalytic activity have been identified in human leukemias, particularly juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.” From this sentence, the participants need to extract (SHP-2–GOF–juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia).
The baseline methods for task 1 or 2 was performed in Zhou et al.’s work [65], while the “agonist vs. LOF” and “antagonist vs. GOF” hypothesis for the support of drug repurposing was proposed in Wang and Zhang’s work [18]. The development of the AGAC corpus [38] laid the basis for the data availability, while PubAnnotation [72] served as the evaluation platform.