COPD is a complex and heterogeneous disease, and thus, it is not easy to investigate the pathogenesis and diagnosis of COPD [3]. Previously, Kim et al. [10] performed RNA-seq analysis with 98 COPD samples and 91 normal samples. However, DEGs identified by a simple calculation of fold-change in gene expression level might not be useful—especially in this study: COPD versus normal (Fig. 1A). The heterogeneity might be attributed to a number of different pathological processes. Among them, bacteria have been reported as one of the major causes in the exacerbation of COPD, contributing to the severe inflammatory response in the 13 airways [32]. While mild-to-moderate COPD exhibits higher diversity in the bacterial population [33], severe COPD shows lower diversity [34].
We confirmed that our COPD data were in the mild stage, based on the expression levels of known marker genes (Fig. 1B). These COPD samples exhibited a marginal but consistent rise in combinatorial diversity in all BCR and TCR loci (Fig. 1C, Supplementary Fig. 1). It is possible that increased diversity of the microbiome in the mild stage of COPD led to increased diversity of BCR and TCR loci. Accordingly, a lower level of similarity was observed between COPD samples compared with normal samples (Fig. 1D, Supplementary Fig. 2).
Our analysis pipeline to identify DEGs was performed considering two aspects: heterogeneity and confidence (Fig. 2A). First, computational deconvolution reduced the heterogeneity between COPD samples. Second, integrative statistical tests were applied to identify confident DEGs. It is known that a combination of t-test, Wilcoxon test, and median difference test can reduce the overestimation by removing biases [35], because conventional t-test-based tools tend to calculate p-values too optimistically when they are applied to a large number of samples [10].
By reducing the heterogeneity, gene expression profiles of COPD samples could become consistent with known expression patterns of marker genes. The DEGs that were identified in our pipeline were better in distinguishing COPD from normal subjects than previously defined DEGs (Fig. 3A and 3B). Through deconvolution, gene expression profiles among COPD samples could become consistent when examined, based on known expression patterns of marker genes. Acute-phase proteins, such as CRP, acute-phase serum amyloid A, and fibrinogens, are well known and are induced in response to inflammation and in COPD [26]. IL6, CXCL8 (IL8), TNF (TNF α), and CSF2 (GM-CSF) are airway inflammatory cytokines that are up-regulated in COPD patients [27,28]. The levels of immune receptors, such as TLR2, 14 TLR4, and IL1R1, increase with smoking [29], but the levels of surfactant protein D decrease [30]. Regardless of deconvolution, some acute-phase proteins (FGA, FGG), cytokines (IL6, CXCL8), and immune receptors were consistently up-regulated in COPD. However, CRP and FGB were up-regulated and SFTPD was down-regulated in COPD only after deconvolution. Moreover, TNF and CSF2 were no longer significantly down-regulated. These observations could be identified, because sample heterogeneity was considered in the analysis.
Up-regulated genes in COPD were related with to functions, such as smooth muscle cell proliferation, protein autophosphorylation, and wound healing (Fig. 3C), consistent with a previous report that oxidative stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction induces inflammation and airway smooth muscle remodeling in COPD [36]. On the other hand, down-regulated genes in COPD were relevant to translational elongation, oxidative phosphorylation coupled to electron transport in mitochondria, and, in particular, neurodegenerative disorders (Fig. 3D), agreeing that COPD patients are likely to develop specific cognitive impairments [37].
Identification of protein interaction subnetworks shed light on specific functions of interaction modules related to the typical phenotypes of COPD (Fig. 4). Functions related to the regulation of transcription, vesicle-mediated transport, regulation of apoptosis, and immune system processes were only observed in subnetworks, not in DEGs. Furthermore, antigen presentation was more confined to MHC class II. In this analysis, the levels of MHC class II genes and some immune components decreased, whereas other immune components were down-regulated in COPD, showing the complexity of immune responses in COPD.
One attractive subnetwork associated with vesicle-mediated transport raised the question of whether protein subcellular localization plays some role in COPD. A group of proteins with subcellular localization changes in COPD were predicted by measuring co-expression scores using information on protein interaction and subcellular localization (Figs. 5 and 6). Interestingly, one-quarter of predicted changes were related to mitochondria, suggesting that proteins targeting mitochondria might be influenced by mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and other proteins on the mitochondrial matrix were enriched in mitochondria in COPD cases.
Here, we used public gene expression profiles generated from COPD and normal subjects and re-evaluated the differential transcriptomes by removing sample heterogeneity. The overall data analysis revealed a group of gene expression changes that were missed in previous research. Co-expression relationships between conditions could be inferred from gene expression profiles and might be useful in classifying samples and predicting protein subcellular localization. In conclusion, COPD is a complex and heterogeneous disease. The newly identified DEGs in this study and DCGPs could partially explain COPD pathogenesis in the mild stage. We expect that our strategy of analyzing heterogeneous samples will be applicable to other systems.