In human genetic association studies with high-dimensional genomic data, a multiple group testing procedure is often required to identify genes or genetic regions that are associated with a disease or a trait since a gene or a genetic region usually contains multiple genetic sites or variants. For instance, single nucleotide polymorphism data, DNA methylation data and sequencing data consist of tens of thousands of genes where each gene has multiple genetic sites. In order to identify genes or genetic regions associated with a phenotype outcome, we need to conduct an individual group test for each gene. However, an individual test for high-dimensional genomic data suffers from multiple testing issues such as the control of family-wise error rate (FWER) or dependent tests. In this reason, Bonferroni adjustment or false discovery rate (FDR) control methods [123] should be performed after computing the p-value of a multiple group test for individual genes or genetic regions.
Alternatively, regularization procedures using a penalized likelihood can be applied for analysis of high-dimensional genomic data. Basically, regularization procedures perform variable selection based on a parametric regression with a penalty function, where a phenotype outcome regresses on all of genetic sites. As a tuning parameter for sparsity is decreasing, the most outcome-related genetic sites can be sequentially selected. One of the most popular regularization procedures for high-dimensional genomic data is lasso (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) [456]. For group selection such as a gene or a genetic region, group lasso can be applied to high-dimensional genomic data that has a group or a cluster structure [78]. Since regularization procedures do not test but select a gene or a genetic region associated with a phenotype outcome, the control of FWER or FDR is not required. However, the selection of the optimal tuning parameter is crucial to determine the number of the outcome-related genes or genetic regions.
The main goal of both the individual group test and the group selection procedure is to identify disease/trait-related genes or genetic regions in analysis of high-dimensional genomic data. Although these two different statistical methods have the same goal, there have been rarely statistical literatures which compare either test performance or selection performance of two statistical methods since hypothesis testing and variable selection have been considered as completely different approaches in statistics. In genetic association studies, however, the testing procedure essentially determines whether each gene or each genetic region is significantly associated with a phenotype outcome or not, while variable selection makes a conclusion which genes or genetic regions are associated with a phenotype outcome. Therefore, we can directly compare the true positives of the group test procedure and the group selection procedure when they identify the same number of disease/trait-related genes or genetic regions.
In this article, we conduct extensive simulation studies in order to compare the performance of both group testing procedures and group selection procedure in terms of true positives. That is, the total number of correctly identified genes or genetic regions is compared when the same number of genes or genetic regions is detected. The simulation studies focus on a case-control association study with high-dimensional genomic data which has a group or a cluster structure. For group testing procedures, we consider commonly used three methods such as principal component analysis (PCA), Hotelling's T2 test, and permutation test. For group selection procedure, we employ group lasso. These four statistical methods are also applied to real high-dimensional DNA methylation data where DNA methylation beta values of CpG sites from approximately 12,000 genes between ovarian cancer cases and healthy controls were generated from Illumina Infinium Human-Methylation27K Beadchip (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).