MeSH [1] is a medical thesaurus developed and maintained by the U.S. National Library of Medicine (NLM) for indexing and cataloging biomedical research articles. MeSH consists of descriptors, qualifiers, and supplementary concept records (SCRs). As of 2018, MeSH contained 28,939 descriptors, 79 qualifiers, and 244,778 SCRs, with each mapped to a unique ID (MeSH ID). Descriptors are hierarchically organized sets of medical concepts, and a descriptor record has a heading (a term in a controlled vocabulary for describing the subjects of articles), entry terms (synonyms to the heading), tree numbers (positions in the hierarchy), scope note (the definition of the subject, in natural language text), and other information. A descriptor may have more than one tree numbers (thus, the MeSH hierarchy is not a tree but a lattice). Qualifiers are terms that are used with a descriptor to define the domain of the study for which the descriptor is applied. SCRs consist mostly of names of substances, having headings and synonyms, but not tree numbers. Instead, SCRs are mapped to the headings in descriptor records.
Due to synonyms, the number of terms that can be mapped to records far exceeds the number of records. For example, there are 234,842 unique terms (headings and synonyms) in MeSH descriptors, and 609,418 unique terms in supplementary concepts. As the synonyms are mapped to headings, via MeSH IDs, and are hierarchically organized, via tree numbers, MeSH represents synonym- and hypernym-hyponym relationships between biomedical terms, and is thus a useful resource for text mining.
MeSH is openly available (downloadable) from the NLM site, and is also included as a part of the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), which also includes translation of MeSH into other languages, including Japanese. The Japanese translation of MeSH, included in the UMLS, was created by NPO Japan Medical Abstracts Society (JAMAS, Igaku-Chuo-Zasshi). The current version, as of February 2019, was released in 2015, and is based on MeSH 2014.
Although the original English MeSH is openly available, other MeSH translations in the UMLS (Czech, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Latvian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese [Brazilian], Russian, Croatian, Spanish, and Swedish) carry the Category 3 License Restriction (https://uts.nlm.nih.gov/license.html); that is, they can only be used at the licencee's site, and cannot be incorporated into publicly accessible computer-based information systems, thus prohibiting creation of open-source, derivative works. These restrictions significantly complicate adapting MeSH for dictionaries used for various NLP tasks.