Filtering steps
Since most programs for fusion gene prediction yield too many false-positives, extensive filtering is essential for reliable performance. In an effort to enhance the precision of the prediction (i.e., small number of false-positives), we have implemented several filtering strategies to prevent accidental alignment leading to false split reads as follows:
(1) Homology filter was applied if the nucleotides of 14 bp length before and after the fusion point were homologous to the original sequences of two participating genes. Bl2seq was used to detect homology with the word size of 10.
(2) Filters for repeat regions, paralogs, and pseudo-genes were implemented as well. We discarded the seed reads that were aligned within the repeat regions obtained from the Repeat-Masker [31] track in the UCSC genome browser. Similarly, gene fusions with paralogous genes obtained from the Duplicated Genes Database [32] or pseudo-genes obtained from the Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) database [33] were removed from the candidates.
(3) In spite of extensive filtering as described above, we still observed many cases where the split read had alternative alignment of similar or better quality elsewhere in the genome. We implemented the multiple mapping filter by running the local version of BLAT v.34 (using the same option as the web version of BLAT) for seed reads to identify such cases of ambiguous multiple mapping (sequence identity > 95%) and removed those from the fusion candidates.
(4) Finally, we choose the fusion candidates with multiple seed reads as reliable (i.e. the minimum number of seed reads = 2).
For K562 cell line data, FusionScan predicted 4 fusion gene pairs in total, and 3 of those were validated experimentally. The workflow in Fig. 1 shows that (1) the homology filter was not effective for this data, (2) removing repeats, paralogs, and pseudo-genes is an important step of reducing 35 candidates, (3) recalibration with BLAT alignment is helpful to reduce 12 additional candidates. However, the condition of multiple seed reads was most critical to yield only 4 fusion candidates.