Viral metagenomics is the study of viral metagenomes (known as viromes), which are obtained directly from environmental samples using viral particle purification and shotgun sequencing. Viral metagenomic studies have increased gradually since the expansion of metagenomic approaches to viral ecology; i.e., over 200 (61 reviews) investigations of the viral communities in environmental samples have been published (Fig. 1) [8-13]. In 2002, Breitbart et al. [8] used shotgun library sequencing and reported that the majority of the sequences in marine viral metagenomes shared no similarity with any genes in public databases, which suggested that most environmental viruses remained uncharacterized. This was the first study using viral metagenomic approaches in the field. Subsequently, many studies have surveyed the viral diversity of unexplored habitats using viral metagenomics.
Cultivation in a host is usually necessary to obtain a virus from the environment that is being investigated. However, the application of metagenomics techniques based on genetic information can circumvent this obstacle [14]. Based on the physical characteristics of virions, viral particles can be isolated from environmental samples, which are enriched using a combination of size filtration (e.g., <0.22 µm) and density gradient centrifugation (e.g., 1.35-1.5 g/mL cesium chloride) [14], so that the virome can be obtained from the purified viral particles. There is a lack of evolutionarily conserved genes, such as the prokaryotic 16S ribosomal RNA gene, in viral genomes. Therefore, the fragmented viral metagenomic sequences obtained by whole-genome shotgun DNA sequencing are used to analyze the viral ecology instead. Viral genomes are small (on average, they comprise a few to several dozen kilobases); so, valuable genome coverage can be achieved easily by DNA sequencing. The advent of high-throughput sequencing techniques, such as 454 pyrosequencing and Illumina sequencing, makes it easier to achieve suitable genome coverage at low cost. Indeed, over 90 of either nearly complete or complete novel viral genomes were assembled using these methods in recent studies [9, 10, 15-20]. However, it is inevitable that an amplification step is necessary for small viral genomes prior to DNA sequencing. Linker amplified shotgun library (LASL) and multiple displacement amplification (MDA) are the main methods used to amplify viromes in viral metagenomics. The LASL method, developed by Breitbart et al. [8], PCR-amplifies a virome after adapter attachment to randomly fragmented viral DNAs. The application of adapter attachment is restricted to double-stranded DNA sequences; so, only double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses can be detected using the LASL method. Thus, the dominance of dsDNA tailed bacteriophages was reported initially in uncultured marine viral assemblages [8], as well as other environmental samples, such as kimchi [11], aquatic water [8], and feces [21]. The MDA technique [22] amplifies DNA isothermally using the phi29 polymerase and random hexaprimers and has been used before in microbiology [22]. The high amplification efficiency of this method means that it is suitable for amplification during viral metagenomics applications. Particularly, the phi29 polymerase of the MDA technique selectively amplifies circular genomes (estimated at 100 times) [10], and it has facilitated the discovery of abundant single-stranded DNA and RNA viruses in environmental samples [23, 24] (described in detail below).