In this study, we have investigated the HLA genotype and haplotype in 11 fulminant T1DM cases and compared its frequency with that of the general population. We have found that the HLA-DRB1*04:05─HLA-DQB1*04:01 haplotype is significantly associated with increased risk of fulminant T1DM in Koreans. In addition, a histidine residue at HLA-DRβ1 position 13 showed marginal association with fulminant T1DM. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the HLA-DR4─HLA-DQ4 haplotype in fulminant T1DM patients from a population other than Japanese. We also investigated for the first time the association between amino acid residues in three positions of the HLA-DR and HLA-DQ molecules and the risk of fulminant T1DM.
It is well known that HLA genes account for a significant proportion of the susceptibility to T1DM [12]. The complex genetic structure of HLA loci arising from recombination, gene conversion, and natural selection has been a hurdle in identifying the precise genetic predisposition [13]. However, the linkage disequilibrium stretches for a long-range in the HLA loci and it is possible to determine accurate HLA genotype, and haplotype using common single nucleotide variations [14]. The SNP2HLA software has been shown to be a powerful tool in imputing HLA genotypes in large-scale genome-wide association studies [5]. However, it has not been applied to whole exome sequence genotype data. We have applied SNP2HLA in 11 cases of fulminant T1DM cases and successfully determined HLA alleles, haplotypes, and amino acid residues. The classic alleles of HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 were determined by direct genotyping of two participants of fulminant T1DM and the results were consistent with the imputed genotypes.
The most well-known HLA haplotype associated with fulminant T1DM is HLA-DRB1*04:05─HLA-DQB1*04:01. In a large-scale association analysis in Japanese, it increased the risk of fulminant T1DM by 2.9 folds. This haplotype was also associated with either acute onset or slowly progressive T1DM in Japanese [15]. In this study, we confirmed this finding and the haplotype was associated with a 4.11 fold increased risk in Koreans. In the Korean Reference Panel, the HLA-DRB1*04:05 allele and HLA-DQB1*04:01 allele were in perfect linkage disequilibrium (r2 = 1.0). Both the HLA-DRB1*04:05 allele and HLA-DQB1*04:01 allele were also significantly associated with the risk of fulminant T1DM (p = 0.011 by Fisher's exact test). Although there are other haplotypes reported to be associated with fulminant T1DM, we had limited statistical power to obtain a sound conclusion.
In a recent report investigating the association of T1DM with amino acid residues at three positions of the HLA-DR and HLA-DQ molecules, HLA-DRβ1 position 13 and position 71, and HLA-DQβ1 position 57 explained a significant portion of phenotypic variation conferred by the HLA-DRB1─HLA-DQA1─HLA-DQB1 locus. We have identified that a histidine residue at HLA-DRβ1 position 13 is marginally associated with a 2.45 fold increased risk of fulminant T1DM. In Europeans this residue was associated with a 3.64 fold increased risk of T1DM [5]. This residue lines the P4 pocket of the HLA-DR molecule and was reported to be associated with rheumatoid arthritis [16]. It could be speculated that it plays a role in the recognition of autoantigens and autoimmunity [5]. However, it is difficult to have a direct comparison of our results with that of T1DM in Europeans, and it is not known whether these amino acid residues in the three positions are also major risk determinants of T1DM in East Asians. In addition, the similarities in genetic predisposition between fulminant T1DM and other types of T1DM require further investigation. It has been suggested that the genetic predisposition predisposition conferred by the HLA locus could be different between fulminant T1DM and other types of T1DM in Japanese [15].
In conclusion, we have investigated the HLA genotype and haplotype in 11 Korean fulminant T1DM cases and provide evidence that HLA-DRB1*04:05─HLA-DQB1*04:01 is an important genetic risk factor of fulminant T1DM. There is suggestive evidence that a histidine residue at HLA-DRβ1 position 13 which lines the P4 pocket of the HLA-DR molecule, might increase the risk of fulminant T1DM in Koreans. Further large-scale investigation is required to confirm our findings.