Based on the location and orientation on the chromosome, lncRNAs are subdivided as intergenic lncRNAs, intronic lncRNAs, bidirectional lncRNAs, sense overlapping lncRNAs, and antisense RNAs (Fig. 1) [9, 10]. Briefly, an intergenic lncRNA locates between two protein-coding genes more than 1 kb away from each other. An intronic lncRNA is placed on the intron region of a protein coding gene in either sense or antisense direction. A biodirectional lncRNA is oriented from the opposite direction within 1 kb of the promoter for the protein-coding gene. In particular, when a protein-coding gene is transcribed, a biodirectional lncRNA counterpart tends to be transcribed as well. It suggests that they might share regulatory factors for the transcription. A sense overlapping lncRNA overlaps with a protein-coding gene on the same DNA strand for its transcription. Since this type of lncRNA extensively lacks the open reading frame for the translation, it can be distinguished from a transcript variant of the protein-coding mRNAs. An antisense lncRNA can be transcribed from the antisense DNA strand of a protein-coding gene. Despite several types of lncRNAs, they are highly probable to have been transcribed by RNA polymerase II, capping, splicing, and polyadenylation [11]. They are also controlled by transcription activators and repressors. However, it has been reported that lncRNAs have limited coding potential.
LncRNAs have different roles in nucleus and cytoplasm (Fig. 2). The lncRNAs in the nucleus function as chromatin remodeling and transcription guides and are active in the regulation of transcription factors (TFs) and TF-associated factors, as well as the regulation of pre-mRNA splicing and miRNA processing [12]. LncRNAs in the cytoplasm function as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) acting as molecular sponges for miRNAs, targeting proteins to regulate their expression, and suppressing translation by targeting mRNAs [13]. In addition to their various roles in cells, lncRNAs are also involved in various human diseases including cardiovascular diseases, autoimmune diseases, neurodegenerative disorders, and psychiatric disorders [10, 14, 15]. In particular, lncRNAs are reported to be closely associated with tumorigenesis [8]. Many lncRNAs act as oncogenic genes in the development of cancer through the regulation of metastasis, cell death suppression, and cell growth, as well they affect the DNA damage response through their relationships with various genes [16]. In the next section, we demonstrate the functions of cancer-related oncogenic lncRNAs in lung cancer, colorectal cancer, glioblastoma, and breast cancer.