Chemical compounds and drugs represent a key biomedical entity of common interest for a range of scientific disciplines, including medicine and clinical research, pharmacology as well as basic biomedical research. Due to the growing amount of clinical texts, medical and biomedical literature and medicinal chemistry patents, a systematic approach to recognize such entities in order to semantically enrich these documents and enable further relation extraction task is needed. Text mining and information extraction efforts are gradually being adopted to empower the transformation of unstructured running texts to more structured data representations that can be directly consumed by content analytics and information retrieval infrastructures [1].Semantically labeling drug mentions in medical documents is a necessary step to allow a range of downstream text mining applications, like drug-resistance, drug dosage recognition, duration of medical treatments, drug repurposing, detection of medication-related allergies, drug-drug interactions or disease-drug relations. Drug names show some inherent characteristics such as the constraints imposed by the International Nonproprietary Names (INN) system by exploiting certain suffixes and prefixes to group them according to certain attributes. For instance, the suffix ‘-caine’ is usually used for local anesthetics. These properties are not only useful for healthcare professionals and pharmacologists to memorize drug names, their attributes and fining them in the clinical literature, they are also constituting valuable attributes for automatically labeling them through language technology tools.Named entity recognition (NER) [2] is the task of automatically extracting and identifying mentions of entities of interest in running text, typically through their mention offsets or by classifying individual tokens whether they belong to entity mentions of not. Among many other uses, such as entity-aware machine translation, NER can also be used for the automated information extraction and anonymization [3] of medical texts. Early techniques involved the use of hand-crafted rules. The most successful approach consisted in using Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), a graph-based model for modeling sequences that still relied on features defined by humans. In the last years, Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques have been improved with the use of word embeddings, that is to say, projections of words to vector spaces such that among other findings, the distance can be used as a semantic similarity measure [4]. Deep learning (e.g., artificial neural networks [ANNs] with a high number of hidden layers) has proved to be extremely useful in solving NER problems. In this article, we introduce PharmacoNER tagger, NER software based on NeuroNER [5] adapted to the domain of Spanish medical texts and improved with non-domain-specific features.