It is proposed that G18 modification base occurrence and non-occurrence in tRNA subsets in Marinobacter is attributed to the inhabitably extreme environments (M. aquaeolei, M. MWYL1), including chemolithotropic N. hamburgensis, N. winogradskyi, and N. oceani. Thus, a notable finding is that only methionine- and proline-specific tRNAs do not have a G residue at the 18th position, and even its absence at the 18th position does not hamper the possibility to methylate the 2'-OH group of ribose in tRNAs. It might be a modified Gm18 base (D loop) that interacts with a ψ55 tertiary base (T loop) for conformational rigidity of the tRNA structure [32]. Another finding is the m1G modification site in tRNAs, in which it was previously reported that only three types of tRNAs (tRNAArg, tRNALeu, and tRNAPro) held a G base next to the anticodon [22, 33]. Later, the m1G modification was reported in additional tRNAs, such as tRNAGln in archaea and tRNAAsp in eukaryotes [34]. A study reported tRNAGln with m1G in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv, tRNAPhe with m1G in Staphylococcus aureus MRSA252, and Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 [31]. The Gm18 modification base G is conserved in these five organisms. For instance, tRNAMet and tRNAPro sequences do not have a G residue at the 18th position. Furthermore, the N. hamburgensis organism does not have a G residue in tRNAValGAC. The m1G and its location are highly conserved and located at the 38th position in tRNAs. Mostly the purine bases G or A are placed next to the anticodon in all tRNAs. This modification may influence the codon-anticodon interaction in the translation process [35]. These findings suggest that either these two modifications are not necessary to occur in all tRNAs or might occur with/without G residues at the respective positions. Hence, we conclude that the Gm18 modifications and m1G37 tRNAs are essential in all three domains and have revealed a conserved tRNAs with m1G37 in a few marine and chemolithoautotrophs. Further study is called for to include more marine and extremophiles to gain insights into tRNA modification bases and their role in biological processes.