Most biological databases have used relational database systems for data storage, retrieval, and searches. The relational database system is a useful system for the storage of well-structured data with pre-defined columns. However, even though it is termed relational, the relational database system does not store relationships among heterogeneous data by themselves. Rather, it infers relationships among different data during a query by using the ‘join’ operation. Thus, paradoxically, the relational database system itself is not relational and is inefficient in the storage and retrieval of diverse relationships among data. As more and more biological data accumulate, it is becoming evident that the relational database system is limited in dealing with multitudes of complex networks and relationships among various kinds of biological data.
To overcome the current limits of the relational database system in dealing with complex biological networks and relationships, we employed and tested the graph database system, one of the NoSQL databases that are actively being developed to deal with various kinds of large data. We used Neo4j, one of the most actively developed, open-source graph databases with property graph models. We first optimized various parameters of a graph database server for maximum performance, as suggested by the Neo4j community, and achieved more than 40% improvement in performance. During the optimization, we found that Neo4j creates many index files for the storage of many relationships and depends heavily on system memory to read and write those index files. Thus, as the size of data increases and as more complex queries are executed, the performance of a graph database depends more on memory than the CPU. Thus, to achieve better performance from a given hardware system, the system memory should first be optimized.
When we compared the performance of Neo4j with MySQL for several queries on diverse relationships, we found that Neo4j always outperformed MySQL in terms of execution time-the more complex the relationships that were queried, the larger the difference in time between the two systems. For very complex relationships-for example, tens of millions of relationships or relationships with more than five steps (or five join operations)-MySQL was unable to finish the query. In this regard, we found that for the study of complex relationships among heterogeneous biological data, the graph database is more promising than the relational database system.
In real life, various kinds of graph databases have changed our lives in many ways. Facebook, LinkedIn, and online airplane booking service companies are examples of companies that utilize graph databases extensively. In the field of biological research, the graph database also has enough potential to find various unknown novel relationships among various heterogeneous biological data.