The word "epigenetics" was termed in the early 1940s to describe the events that could not be wholly explained by traditional genetics [2]. Conrad Waddington (1905-1975) defined epigenetics as "the branch of biology which studies the causal interactions between genes and their products which bring the phenotype into being" [3]. The epigenetic field now actively uncovers the molecular mechanisms underlying these phenomena, and epigenetics has been defined today as "the study of changes in gene function that are mitotically and/or meiotically heritable and that do not entail a change in DNA sequence" [4]. In other words, epigenetics is the study of changes in gene expression or phenotype, caused by mechanisms other than DNA sequences, and some of these epigenetic changes have even been shown to be heritable.Our genetic information is stored in the form of DNA as genetic code, but it has to be copied into RNA as an intermediate messenger or non-coding functional component. This copying process, transcription, is regulated at several steps, including initiation, elongation, and termination, by a variety of mechanisms. Moreover, eukaryotic transcription has to deal with chromatin templates, such that histone modifications and chromatin remodeling vastly affect gene expression. Several types of cancers and genetic disorders are often associated with abnormal transcription, highlighting the importance of regulated transcription in the pathology and prevention of cancers.Part of the genome has no transcribed information, which, however, has functional roles by various mechanisms. For example, cis elements (DNA sequences) can act as regulatory elements for transcription and replication. Also, centromeric DNA is required for mitotic and meiotic chromatin structure, and telomeric DNA plays a role in sheltering the ends of chromosomes and eventually guarding the genome. Indeed, centromeric and telomeric heterochromatin structures consist of specific repetitive sequences, which play a role in maintaining genomic integrity, such that heterochromatin structure is required for accurate chromosome segregation (centromere) and inhibiting DNA breakages and nonhomologous end-joining (telomere). Aneuploidy and chromosomal rearrangement, which are frequently observed in many cancers, are in part caused by aberrant chromatin structure.Generally, genomic instability is often associated with cancer and can be indicative of a poor prognosis for some types of cancer. Lately, this concept has now been expanded to the field of epigenetics, and disorganization of epigenetic regulatory mechanisms is prevalent in cancer [5, 6]. Particular gene expression is determined not only by the genetic status of gene itself but also by epigenetic features, such as promoter regions, enhancers, and insulators, in chromatin and chromatin-modifying enzymes.Mutations in tumor suppressors and/or oncogenes induce a loss or gain of function, respectively, and abnormal expression of these genes are likely to be linked to cancer initiation. Feinberg proposed a hypothesis that epigenetic alterations can induce genetic changes and contribute to tumor progression and also initiation [7]. Epigenetic changes occur without a change in the DNA sequence, and they can be induced by various factors, such as chromatin structure, including DNA methylation, histone variants, and modifications; nucleosome remodeling; and small non-coding regulatory RNAs (Fig. 2) [8]. In addition to histone proteins, DNA is associated with several nonhistone chromosomal proteins, including high-mobility group and heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), which can also play an important regulatory role in DNA-dependent processes, such as transcription, replication, recombination, and DNA repair, in a similar manner to histones.