The transcriptome is the entire set of RNA transcripts in a given cell for a specific developmental stage or physiological condition [1]. Understanding the transcriptome is necessary for interpreting the functional elements of the genome as well as for understanding the underlying mechanisms of development and disease. Microarray technologies have been used for high-throughput large-scale RNA-level studies, such as to identify differentially expressed genes between developmental stages or between healthy and diseased groups [2]. However, its hybridization- based nature limits the ability to catalog and quantify RNA molecules expressed under various conditions. Advances in massive parallel DNA sequencing technologies have enabled transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) by sequencing of cDNA. RNA-seq has rapidly replaced microarray technology because of its better resolution and higher reproducibility; this method can be used to extend our knowledge of alternative splicing events [3], novel genes and transcripts [4], and fusion transcripts [5].
One concern regarding the application of RNA-seq is abundance estimation at the gene-level and transcript-level differential expression under distinct conditions. Routine RNA-seq workflow may consist of the following five steps as shown in Fig. 1: (1) preprocessing of raw data, (2) read alignment, (3) transcriptome reconstruction, (4) expression quantification, and (5) differential expression analysis. As an initial step, RNA-seq data may be subjected to quality control (QC) of the raw data before data analysis. Similar to whole genome or exome sequencing, read alignment can be performed to map the reads to the reference genome or transcriptome. Clinical samples including formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimen and cancer tissue biopsies are often degraded or exist in limited amount [6]. Thus additional QC procedure can be performed to evaluate the performance of the RNA-seq experiment itself after read alignment. Next, transcriptome reconstruction is carried out to identify all transcripts expressed in a specimen based on read mapping data. If there is no available reference sequence, this procedure can be conducted directly using a de novo assembly approach. Once all transcripts are identified, their abundances can be estimated using read mapping data. Finally, differential expression analysis is conducted using currently available programs. In this review, we discuss the RNA-seq workflow and its related bioinformatics tools in each step (Table 1), focusing on transcriptome reconstruction and abundance quantification.