The window-based mechanism is a well-known mechanism in data science and biodata mining. Usually, it can be implemented with data that has a sequential relation to capture the local statistical parameters and to infer the main global information structure. The window-based mechanism has specific computational parameters, these parameters can be summarized as follows: (1) window-length or size (L), (2) shifting distance (α), and (3) random feature vector (Xn). Those computational parameters play a key role in estimating the local statistical parameters and in inferring the main global information structure of the data under consideration. Therefore, those computational parameters provide the analyst with various insights about data, and they can help to understand data and to evaluate the implemented computational mechanism. In case of composite data point, each data point is a dataset, thus, we have another level of computations. In other words, we have to model data-insight of extracted information using a distance measure/metric or a composite distance measure/metric and a visualization tool (e.g., graphs). In case of a segmented genome of a virus, each segment can be encoded to 1 or more proteins, and each protein is a sequence. Therefore, a segmented genome is a composite data point. Now, without loss of generality, let us assume that we define a (p×1) random feature vector X in IRp, to use it in screening a composite data point and model its information structure. However, to model any information structure, we have to define a statistical concept, and in this case, we choose the variation theory as a statistical concept. In other words, we aim to model variation-based information structure as data-insight to evaluate the window-based mechanism and to visualize composite data point in a given feature space. In case of univariate or multivariate, the variation theory has various statistical parameters and models. One of those parameters is the variance-covariance matrix. Define Xn as occurrence of all possible n-grams, hence X has the dimension (p×1), where p=|Σ| n, Σ is a finite alphabet, and n is string-length. Define the variance-covariance matrix of Xn as ΩXn, which it has the dimension (p×p). Up to this point, each sequence in a composite data point can be represented by a variance-covariance matrix. Thus, let the composite data point be denoted by CDP = {Seq1, Seq2, ..., Seqm}, thus, obviously each sequence Seqi in CDP can be represented by a variance-covariance matrix ΩXn . To compute ΩXn , we have to extract data-vectors {x1, x2, ..., xl} from Seqi as defined by Xn using the window-based mechanism. We can motivate the main idea of this paper in the following way. We aim to model an existing information structure as a data-insight of a given composite data point using undirected graph as a visualization technique, and to evaluate window-based mechanism as a feature extraction technique. One of the essential difficulties involved in this problem is measuring the distance between any two variance-covariance matrices. As stated in his PhD dissertation, Mosaab Daoud [8] proposed a solution for the composite data points proximity problem. The solution defined a new metric space Ψ,Dijγ1, where Ψ is a class of composite data points, and Dij(γ1)is a metric. Dij(γ1) is defined as follows:
D i j ( γ 1 )   =   | γ 1 j   ( Ω X n ( i )   −   Ω X n i   ) γ 1 |   =   | λ 1 |   >   0
where λ1 is the largest generalized eigenvalue (associated with the generalized eigenvector γ1) of the matrix ΩXn(i)-ΩX(j). Now, by using the window-based feature extraction mechanism we can map CDP into a family of sets of data-vectors DVα,L={x1(i), x2(i), ... , xl(i)}; S(i)eqi∈CDP, α∈Θ,L∈Z+} thereafter, we can map each DVα,L into a set of variance-covariance matrices VC={ΩXn;Seqi∈CDP}. In this way, we compose a family of sets of variance-covariance matrices. By implementing the metric Dij(γ1), we can map each V C into a set of distance values in the interval [0, ∞). It should be noted that Θ is a set of all possible values of the shifting-distance α, L is the window-size, and Z+ is the set of positive integers (Θ and Z+ are parameter spaces). In decision theory and risk analysis [9], we have a concept called the seriousness of the difference. It is hard to measure the seriousness of the difference in a family of variance-covariance matrices (note: a family is a set of instances, and each instance is a set of variance-covariance matrices), but we can depict the seriousness of the difference among instances in a family of variance-covariance matrices using undirected graph, which is one of the objectives of this paper. Consequently, in an undirected graph, each sequence will be represented by a node and each distance value will be represented by an edge. In this way, we can measure the seriousness of the difference in a family of variance-covariance matrices. Finally, in the next section, we shall discuss the proposed approach by using real data. The computational process of this approach is illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2.