Molecular mechanisms and signals regulated by TMPRSS4
Numerous studies have focused on the investigation of in vivo substrates of TTSPs. However, few studies have conclusively addressed the in vivo molecular targets and function of TTSPs during tumor progression. In vitro, several TTSPs, including matriptase, were shown to activate prourokinase plasminogen activator, pro-macrophage stimulating protein-1, and pro-HGF, which are implicated in the proliferation, migration and invasion of various cancer cell types [23].
Like most of the members of the TTSP family, TMPRSS4 can activate epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) in vitro through its proteolytic activity, possibly regulating sodium and water flux across high-resistance epithelia [48, 49]. TMPRSS4 induces cancer cell invasion in a manner that is dependent on serine proteolytic activity [38], and inhibitory compounds against TMPRSS4 serine protease activity were reported to reduce colon cancer cell invasion [50]. However, it remains unknown which precursor substrates are cleaved by TMPRSS4 to contribute to tumor progression. On the other hand, it has recently been reported that TMPRSS4 induces urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) gene expression through activation of the transcription factors AP-1, Sp1, and Sp3 in mainly a JNK-dependent manner in prostate and lung cancer cells but not in colon cancer cells [44]. uPA is a well-known serine protease involved in invasion and metastasis and correlates with poor prognosis in breast, lung, stomach, bladder, colon, prostate, and ovarian cancers [51], and TMPRSS4 expression significantly correlates with uPA expression in human lung and prostate adenocarcinomas [44]. In addition, TMPRSS4-mediated uPA expression contributes to prostate cancer cell invasion (Fig. 1) [44]. It is intriguing that TMPRSS4 activates JNK signaling pathways, possibly through its association with uPAR, leading to uPA expression. uPAR can induce the EMT and stem cell-like properties in breast cancer cells by activating diverse cell signaling pathways, including ERK, phosphoinositide-3-kinase-Akt, and Rac1 [45, 52]. Therefore, the association of TMPRSS4 and uPAR and subsequent cell signaling modulation may be a novel mechanism for the control of invasion and the EMT.
The observations that TMPRSS4 modulates cell signaling and subsequently activates both AP-1 and Sp1/3 transcriptional activities [44], which have been reported to be involved in the transcriptional regulation of the EMT and invasion [53], suggest that TMPRSS4 could modulate the expression of various genes, which may be associated with invasion and metastasis.