In the last decade, viral ecologists have focused on community-level analyses of viruses to understand their abundance and genetic diversity in specific environments. The ecological effects of viruses, particularly bacteriophages, are known to control host populations via the "kill the winner system," while they drive mortality and evolutionary change in microorganisms via lateral gene transfer by infecting their host bacteria, although the basic issue of "who infects whom" is poorly understood [2, 29, 51, 52]. In the ocean, for example, viruses regulate the microbial abundance, release dissolved organic matter, and affect global biogeochemical cycles by killing up to 40% of host bacteria per day [53, 54]. In contrast, symbiotic functions of viruses, such as host survival, competition, and protection from pathogenic infections, are beginning to be understood [55], and evidence for a beneficial interaction in phage-host interactions was found in the mammalian gut ecosystem [29, 56]. When host survival is threatened, a variety of environmental factors can trigger prophage induction, and the liberated prophages may become completely virulent [57]. Overall, these studies suggest that prophage induction may responsible for triggering dysbiosis and changes in the microbial population by altering host phenotypes, thereby leading to a new environmental niche.
Traditionally, host culture-dependent techniques, such as plaque assays, have been widely used for the identification of phage and host bacteria interactions. However, plaque assays require isolated host bacteria; so, they are low-throughput methods. This method is also difficult to apply to environmental samples where lysogenic infections are prevalent, because the method relies on observations of visible plaque formations, which are often absent from lysogenic infections [3, 58, 59]. Recently, Deng et al. [52] demonstrated a new technique, known as "viral tagging," for identifying the interactions between cultivated host bacteria and their phages, which used the nucleic acid stain SYBR Gold to generate fluorescently labeled phages, so that the host cells fluoresced with viral tagging, thereby allowing the sorting of virus-tagged cells by flow cytometry [52, 60]. This emerging technique is undoubtedly helpful for not only exploring virus-host interactions in their natural habitats when the method is combined with other experimental tools, such as single viral genomics [61] and phageFISH [62], but also identifying viral receptors in macro-organisms (e.g., the mammalian gut) if the method is combined with a fluorescently labeled receptor protein during histological examinations.