Iron is one of the essential nutrients for host and pathogenic bacteria, and both require the metal as a cofactor or as a prosthetic group for biologically important proteins that are involved in many basic cellular functions [1]. Most iron in the mammalian host is sequestered and bound to high-affinity iron-binding proteins, such as transferrin, lactoferrin, and ferritin, or complexed to the heme of hemoproteins [2]. Hence, iron is rarely found as free iron in the mammalian host and is one of the major limiting factors of pathogenic bacteria. Therefore, pathogenic bacteria have evolved sophisticated mechanisms for the acquisition of iron from host tissues because of the limited availability of iron to the bacteria and the inevitable competition with the host [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
Siderophores are high-affinity iron-chelating compounds secreted by pathogenic bacteria [3]. Siderophores are classified into three major groups-catecholates, hydroxamates, and carboxylates-by the ligands that are used to chelate the ferric iron [7]. The diversity of siderophores may have resulted from evolutionary pressure, causing the bacteria to produce structurally different siderophores that can not be transported by specific transport systems of other bacteria. For example, Escherichia coli produces a prototype catechol siderophore, which is a cyclic trimer of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoyl-L-serine [5]. In comparison, vibriobactin, produced by Vibrio cholera, is a non-cyclic derivative of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHBA) [9]. Genes that are involved in the biosynthesis and uptake of siderophores are often clustered within the bacterial genome, and their products are closely linked to the virulence of pathogenic bacteria.
Like the pathogenesis of many other bacteria, the pathogenesis of Acinetobacter baumannii, a major opportunistic pathogen that causes serious diseases in compromised patients, including pneumonia, bacteremia, urinary tract infection, sepsis, and meningitis [10, 11], depends primarily on the organism's ability to uptake and utilize iron [12, 13, 14]. Numerous studies have investigated the response of various A. baumannii isolates in iron-limited conditions and identified several gene clusters that are required for the synthesis and transport of siderophores [15]. Especially, the acinetobactin-mediated iron acquisition system has been the most extensively characterized system in A. baumannii [16, 17]. Acinetobactin, a catechol-hydroxamate siderophore, which is a non-cyclic derivative of DHBA that is linked to threonine and N-hydroxyhistamine, is produced and utilized by three putative systems encoded within the acinetobactin gene cluster of A. baumannii. Moreover, A. baumannii strains have significant genetic diversity in the numbers and types of these iron uptake and utilization systems [15]. Therefore, these results indicate that genetic diversity in acinetobactin gene clusters could be a major factor in determining the virulence among A. baumannii strains. In this review, we describe a gene cluster in the genome of A. baumannii that is involved in the biosynthesis and transport of acinetobactin. Furthermore, we present the genetic diversity of the gene cluster that is responsible for acinetobactin biosynthesis and transport in different A. baumannii strains.