B chromosomes are supernumerary chromosomes that are present in addition to the standard chromosome complements in eukaryotes. Although they are not essential for normal growth and development of an organism, they have been identified in approximately 15% of all eukaryotes, including numerous plant and animal species [1,2]. B chromosomes differ from A chromosomes with distinctive features such as lack of chromosome pairing during meiosis and non-Mendelian inheritance. They may be present and variable in number in some individuals of a population. Individuals with B chromosomes usually do not display obvious phenotypic differences from normal diploids, and B chromosomes do not offer selective advantage to the host in most cases [1-3]. However, supernumerary chromosomes can be detrimental to the host, as observed in rye which more than 8 B chromosomes results in low fertility [4].
Although the mechanism of de novo B chromosome occurrence is unclear, recent studies have delineated the origin of B chromosomes in several species. Next-generation sequencing of A and B chromosomes sorted from rye (Secale cereale) revealed that the B chromosomes were a mosaic of host genome and organellar DNA sequences [5]. Integrated genomic analyses after B chromosome microdissection showed that B chromosomes contain thousands of sequences derived from A chromosomes of the entire ancestral karyotype of the cichlid fish (Astatotilapia latifasciata) [6]. Because B chromosomes exhibit no obvious phenotypic effects and are selectively neutral, B chromosomes were often regarded as “selfish” chromosomes, containing highly repetitive heterochromatic elements without functional genes [3]. Indeed, sequences of maize B chromosomes were enriched with highly repetitive DNA sequences that showed no homology with known genes other than retrotransposon sequences and miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements [7]. However, these repeat sequences are not specific to B chromosomes because they are also present on A chromosomes. In cichlid fish, B chromosomes were shown to be filled with a variety of transposable elements and simple repeats, with low complexity sequences constituting only a small portion of the genetic material. Nonetheless, high integrity genes involved in cell division were detected in the cichlid fish B chromosomes [6]. Moreover, the idea of transcriptional inertness of B chromosome genes was declined because of the recent discovery of several transcriptionally active genes in B chromosomes [8,9]. For instance, ribosomal RNA genes of the B chromosomes were actively transcribed in the grasshopper (Eyprepocnemis plorans) [10,11]. Huang et al. [9] conducted transcriptome analyses in 1B and 0B maize plants, in which several genes were localized to B chromosomes, and three of the genes encoded long terminal repeat (LTR)–retrotransposons. These genes have A chromosome paralogs, and expression of B chromosome paralogs was confirmed by bioinformatic analyses. Moreover, whole transcriptome profiles were altered by the presence of B chromosomes, displaying advancement with increased B chromosome number [9]. In Drosophila melanogaster, presence of B chromosomes may act as an enhancer or suppressor of position-effect variegation, depending on the genetic background [12]. Lin et al. [13] analyzed transcript profiles from inbred maize strains by cDNA-AFLP (amplified fragment length polymorphism) and found that B chromosomes contained transcriptionally active genes and altered A chromosome gene transcription compared to the maize strain lacking B chromosomes.
The genus Lilium includes about 110–115 species that are widely distributed in temperate zones of the Northern Hemisphere [14]. Northeast Asia is the proposed center of origin for the Lilium genus, and 13 Lilium species have been identified in the Korean Peninsula [14,15]. Since the first report on B chromosomes in Lilium japonicum in 1932 [16], 33 Lilium species have been identified to carry B chromosomes (http://www.bchrom.csic.es/), which accounts for approximately 30% of the species in the Lilium genus. Lilium amabile (2n = 2x = 24) is an endemic lily that grows wild throughout the Korean Peninsula. The lilies are easily found on hills and small mountains, but not high mountains and deep forest. L. amabile contains four types of B chromosomes: one large, almost acrocentric; one large, acrocentric that differs in arm index from other large B chromosomes; one small, acrocentric; and one small, metacentric chromosome. There are 12 cytotypes of L. amabile, depending on B chromosome composition [17]. Currently, there are no reports on gene expression in L. amabile; our study contains de novo transcriptome profiles of the 1 B and 0B chromosomes of this plant species.