Implementation
As depicted in Fig. 2, the ontology-based GIS application was implemented using a combination of the two platforms of ArcGIS [22] and Protégé [23] and MySQL as a database management system. ArcGIS is a commercial software package containing a set of integrated applications, such as ArcMap and ArcCatalog. ArcMap is the main mapping application allowing users to generate maps, query attributes, analyze spatial relationships, and lay out final projects. The ArcCatalog application allows users to manage geographic data [24].
Several programs have been developed to edit and view ontologies, such as Ontolingua and Protégé. Both Ontolingua and Protégé are capable of generating a separate frame for every knowledge item that covers the information, such as definitions, links, and relationships [20]. In the proposed application, we applied the Protégé software as an ontology-developing environment. Protégé is a free and open-source platform that provides a set of tools for constructing domain ontologies and knowledge-based applications. We constructed the rumen microbial genome ontology to organize genome-related data, including classes (e.g., microbial genomes found in rumen and their associated genes) and their relationships/properties (e.g., gene name, product, catalyzed reaction, and accession number of a gene). In order to implement the system, we applied the genome-annotated data of several ruminal microbes deposited in NCBI.
In the first phase of implementation, the genome-annotated data were stored in a MySQL database using Navicat software (Fig. 3). Navicat, as a powerful solution for MySQL administration, offers a graphical interface for managing databases (http://navicat.com/). The second phase involved the connection of the database to both ArcGIS and Protégé as the GIS engine and ontology platform, respectively. The database was connected to the ArcCatalog application of ArcGIS. The genome layers were created as shapefiles via ArcCatalog and displayed in an ArcMap environment (Fig. 4). As shown in Fig. 5, the DataMaster plugin of Protégé was integrated with a MySQL database through a JDBC driver. DataMaster is a plugin for Protégé editor that allows the conversion of a relational database into an RDF model (resource descriptive framework) that can be processed and understood by machines [25]. After integrating DataMaster with the MySQL database, each of the tables from the database was imported into Protégé as an OWL class, along with its instances and properties.