Genetic epidemiology is the study of the role of genetic factors in determining health and disease in families and in populations and the interplay of such genetic factors with environmental factors [1]. Depending on the number of genetic factors that contribute to pathogenicity, genetic diseases are categorized into two classes. A so-called monogenic disorder is usually caused by a single gene mutation and has been the subject of intense gene hunting studies using familial linkages, totaling to more than 4,000 diseases being linked to causal mutations [2]. Completion of the Human Genome Project expedited the studies of not only monogenic diseases but also complex diseases. The latter, also called polygenic or multifactorial diseases, are contributed by a number of genetic factors of relatively smaller effects. Unlike monogenic disorders that often affect only a small portion of a population and are consequently rarely observed, polygenic diseases are usually frequently observed in a population and are also termed common diseases. Chronic diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, hypertension, and so on, belong to this category.
The Human Genome Project paved the way to cataloging common variants in the human genome. The International HapMap Project is a global collaboration to map single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome and to construct haplotype maps that show which allele of a locus co-occur with which allele of another locus. Using three representative continental populations-that is, Africans, Europeans, and Asians-the international consortium cataloged roughly 1 SNP for every 300 bp of the human genome. The information of position, frequency, and correlation structure, called linkage disequilibrium of these SNPs, has enabled us to design high-density SNP chips that can measure the genotypes of fractions of those SNPs all at once and infer the genetic make-up of the major portion of the whole genome. Using these chips, genotypes of families or unrelated populations are measured, and the loci displaying statistically significantly different frequency patterns between disease-affected and unaffected groups are sought. Individuals harboring such alleles may have a higher or lower disease susceptibility than control groups. Scanning genome-wide associations of genotype-phenotype relationships is called a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and has become extremely popular, reporting more than 1,000 papers within the last 5-6 years [3], probably due to the hypothesis-free nature of its study design. While GWASs have been applied to studies of disease gene hunting, they are also well suited to interrogating genes affecting heritable phenotypes, such as height, obesity, plasma glucose concentration, blood pressure, bone density, and so on. Unlike disease studies where samples are segregated into case and control groups, these phenotypes display a continuous spectrum of values in normal populations. For s uch a quantitative trait, its statistical correlation with the genotypes within a population is sought, instead of dichotomizing the samples into case and control groups. The genomic loci that show correlations with such a trait are called quantitative trait loci (QTLs).