Subjects for the case-control study
A discovery stage included 305 blood samples obtained from the outpatient clinic of the Gastroenterology Department and from the Center for Health Promotion of Ajou University Hospital (Suwon, Korea) without gender or age restrictions between March 2002 and February 2006. Samples were derived from genetically unrelated Korean patients. The experimental protocol was approved by the institutional review board. Samples were divided into SR control (n = 107), HEP (n = 111), and CIR (n = 87) groups, according to serological markers and biopsy results. Three samples in the HEP group were not genotype-replicated and were excluded from the analysis. Finally, 107 SR control, 108 HEP, and 87 CIR patients were analyzed.
In the replication stage, 736 blood samples were collected from Ajou University Hospital and Keiymung University (Daegu, Korea) between February 2006 and September 2012. Samples were derived from genetically unrelated Korean patients. The experimental protocol was approved by the institutional review board. Samples were divided into two 205 SR controls, 437 HEP patients, and 94 CIR patients according to serological markers and biopsy results.
All samples were infected with HBV and classified into one of the three groups, according to their HBV infection status, clinical data, and serological profile, by a pathologist. Every 6 months for >12 months, the 218 patients were subjected to serological tests for serum levels of hepatitis B core antibody (Anti-HBc II Reagent Kit; Abbott Laboratories, South Pasadena, CA, USA), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Anti-HBs; Abbott Laboratories), and hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) (HBsAg; Abbott Laboratories). Liver function was evaluated by measuring aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), albumin, and bilirubin levels using commercially available assays. All samples showed elevated ALT at least once during the follow-up period and were positive for HBV DNA, irrespective of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) positivity. Patients in the SR group were HBsAg-negative, HBeAg-negative, anti-HBs-positive, and anti-HBc-positive and had recovered from HBV infection. Patients in the CLD group, including those in the HEP and CIR groups, were HBsAg-positive for more than 6 months with elevated ALT and AST (≥2 times the normal upper limit). Samples that were positive for anti-hepatitis C virus (Genedia HCV ELISA 3.0; GreenCross, Yoingin, Korea) or anti-immunodeficiency virus antibodies (HIV Ag/Ab combo; Abbott Laboratories) were excluded.