Recent progress in high-throughput sequencing technology has contributed to the generation of genome-wide somatic mutation profiles in diverse cancer samples. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is one of largest collaborative efforts to generate multi-level omics data on human cancer tissue samples. Particularly, information on genome-wide somatic mutations has been collectively profiled from exome sequencing data from thousands of patients' tumor samples. Somatic mutation is a main driving force for cancer development and progression. Thus, many researchers have tried to complete the catalog of somatic mutations in cancer cell lines [1, 2]. Somatic mutation is also known to be involved in key mechanisms for cellular sensitivity or resistance against chemotherapy [3-5].
In our previous study using cancer cell line data, we reported that somatic mutation was a more significant classifier than cancer lineage in predicting the anticancer drug response [6]. Thus, we identified many unknown association patterns between cancer drug response and mutational genotypes in cancer cell lines-e.g., MYC-amp mutation-specific sensitivity of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor inhibitors. In addition, mutation information provided important clues for us to better interpret the biological relevance of molecular signatures identified from the transcriptome and proteome data of diverse cancer cell lines. The next step should be to find out the clinical application of mutation-specific drug responses or molecular signatures obtained from cell line-based analysis.
Thus, it is important to systematically analyze the mutational genotype (mutaome) of various human tissue samples and identify mutations significantly associated with specific types of tumors. 'Mutaome' means the cancer mutational landscape, including mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressors. In the present study, we organized all sequence-based mutation information into gene-based frequency data. Then, we comparatively determined the major genes of somatic mutations in diverse cancer subtypes and cancer stages (i.e., non-metastatic and metastatic samples). This work will provide practical information for directing in vitro cell line-based mutation-specific phenotypes to clinical applications in cancer drug discovery and mechanism studies.