Assembly is the process of merging overlapped short reads into larger contiguous sequences (contigs). Current sequencing technologies normally break genomic DNA into pieces, and original genomic sequences need to be recovered from fragmented reads by an assembly process. In metagenomics for retrieving coding regions, it is necessary to make it easier to do functional annotations, as a more accurate classification/annotation is possible in longer sequence information. Most assemblers have been developed for the single genome or clonal populations with high coverage. There are currently few metagenomic assemblers, as metagenomic reads are more complex, owing to nonclonal heterogeneous reads resulting from multiple strains differing only by partial regions or rearrangements, lower or uneven coverage across genomes, sharing of repetitive sequences among closely related species, and lateral gene transfer sharing similar entities between distantly related organisms.
At an early stage of metagenomic studies, reference mapping approaches (e.g., Newbler, AMOS, MIRA) were applied to the metagenome assembly process. However, with the low coverage and complexity of megenomic reads, de novo assemblers were preferred to reference mapping, based on the advantage of feasibility for dealing with the aforementioned problems. Starting from initial assemblers, such as SOAPdenovo [56], there are now several improved assemblers available: are Genovo [57], Meta-IDBA [58], Meta-Velvet [59], MAP [60], and Ray Meta [61]. Metagenome-specialized assemblers have to distinguish reads from different species. MetaVelvet and Meta-IDBA resolve this issue by partitioning the de brujin graph based on k-mer coverage and separately assemble each subgraph. Ray Meta does not decompose the de brujin graph; instead, it uses a heuristics-guided graph traversal approach to find the optimal assembly. Meta-IDBA, MetaVelvet, and Ray Meta were developed to perform well on short reads (e.g., Illumina sequencing). On the other hand, other tools, like Genovo and MAP, were developed for longer reads (e.g., 454 sequencing). The outputs from various assemblers can be used to generate scaffolds using Bambus2 by avoiding misjoins between distantly related organisms by detecting repeats and genomic variants [62].