INCEpTION
INCEpTION [13] is a text annotation platform that integrates interactive annotation, knowledge management and corpus creation into a single platform. The system provides “recommenders” that learn from user annotations and provide annotation suggestions. External document repositories can be accessed to search and load documents into INCEpTION for later annotation. The platform aims at a high level of interoperability by supporting common formats and standards for annotation representation and knowledge representation and it offers a remote API allowing it to be integrated into external workflows. It is based on the UIMA CAS [14] data model. In addition to supporting the definition of a custom annotation schema, several of the annotation types defined by DKPro Core [8] come pre-configured (e.g., Part-of-Speech [POS], Named Entity, etc.).
We envision a scenario where, for example, documents can be retrieved from PubMed Central via PubAnnotation, automatically annotated using LAPPS Grid services, and manually annotated/corrected using INCEpTION (where INCEpTION can use LAPPS Grid services to automatically generate annotation suggestions). However, at present combining the relevant functionalities of each of the three platforms is not fully achievable, due to a lack of cross-platform interoperability. Inter-platform interoperability among the platforms is fundamentally a function of their ability to exchange data consisting of text and associated annotations. This means that the data must be mutually “understandable,” either directly or via trivial conversion, and that it must further be possible to appropriately utilize data from the other platforms within the constraints of their respective architectures. To address both of these considerations, in the following sections we consider two levels of interoperability for each pair of platforms: the “data level” (model and schema) interoperability, and “process level” (triggering of and reacting to events) interoperability.