The goal of IHEC
IHEC aims at cataloging 1,000 human reference epigenomes for the next 7 to 10 years. The 1,000 epigenome includes 250 types of human cells, and 10% of the epigenome can be mapped on a model organism. A long-term objective of IHEC is to determine the extent to which the epigenome has shaped human populations over generations and in response to the environment and to produce human reference epigenome maps for key cellular status relevant to health and disease. IHEC will focus on key cellular status, such as stemness, immortality, proliferation, differentiation, senescence, and stress, thereby generating new knowledge that will catalyze progress in health research and regenerative medicine. IHEC will coordinate rapid distribution of the data to the entire research community with minimal restrictions to accelerate translation of this new knowledge into health and diseases. IHEC also will coordinate the development of common bioinformatics standards, data models, and analytical tools to organize, integrate, and display whole epigenomic data generated from this important international effort. IHEC will set up an efficient structure that will coordinate this international effort so that the interest and priorities of individual participants, self-organizing consortia, funding agencies, and nations are addressed. IHEC will encourage the minimal amount of redundancy between the different epigenetics efforts around the world. IHEC will also interact and coordinate its efforts with other international projects, such as ICGC and ENCODE. The secondary goal of IHEC is to catalyze the development of new and robust technologies that will facilitate the characterization and functional analysis of the epigenome in health and diseases, thereby driving down the costs of epigenome mapping substantially, and to support the dissemination of knowledge and standards related to new technologies, software, and methods to facilitate data integration and sharing between epigenetics researchers around the globe. By the production of 1,000 epigenomes, IHEC expects that we can understand the key cellular aspects of 250 types of human cells more deeply. Also, having ~250 types of reference epigenomes, we can have the power to compare disease epigenomes to normal references, which will help explain the missing heritability of common complex diseases. Now, the production of >600 epigenomes has been planned, and ~60 epigenomes have been finished [3, 4].