Replication timing and CNV instability in human populations and cancers
The relationship of DNA replication timing and genomic instability, which is involved in genomic mutation and human disease, is what people are most concerned about. As mentioned above, human mutation rates, based on evolutionary divergence and single-nucleotide polymorphism frequency, are increased in late-replicated regions [69]. Koren et al. [75] generated a high-resolution timing profile of the human genome and investigated the relationship between DNA replication timing and point mutations. In accordance with the previous discovery, this association was also observed and proved to be much stronger.
How is CNV related to replication timing? Recent studies showed some distinct but multi-dimensional relationships between CNVs and replication timing. Based on the duplication hotspots conserved between two species of Drosophila, Cardoso-Moreira et al. [85] explored the roles of replication timing in genomic instability. They found that Drosophila duplication hotspots were enriched in late-replicated regions, unlike the aforementioned sequences of high sequence identity in the human genome. However, in spite of the association observed in Drosophila, the situation seems to be more complicated in mammalian genomes. In the study of Koren et al. [75], the relationship between early/late replication timing and CNV mutation was also investigated. The CNVs, mediated by different mechanisms, showed divergent patterns, suggesting a multi-dimensional interaction between CNVs and replication timing.
In addition to the observations in human populations, recent findings have also discovered the relationship of genomic reorganization and the subsequently generated genetic variation during cell fate changes. Lu et al. [86] have investigated the impact of altered replication timing on the CNV landscape during reprogramming. Approximately 40% of the human genome changes with regard to replication timing between human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and their parent fibroblasts. Intriguingly, the CNV distribution shows a correlation with the changed timing profile. In particular, CNV gains tend to be located in the genomic regions that switch to replicate earlier. This correlation is conserved among different reprogramming methods.
Compared with cell fate changes, replication timing is disrupted in many disease states, including cancer [87]. It has been noticed that numerous alterations to the replication program take place during carcinogenesis. One of the changes is the aberrant asynchronous replication of loci that replicate synchronously in normal cells. This phenomenon exists in not only cancer but also noncancerous cells [88, 89, 90]. This abnormal replication program apparently has a notable impact on genomic stability and thus increases the frequency of chromosomal rearrangements and CNVs. Recent findings have indicated that aberrant DNA replication timing is involved in changes in gene expression, epigenetic modifications, and an increased CNV mutation frequency [91, 92]. An analysis of 331,724 somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) has shown that SCNAs increase in late-replicating regions among cells of different cancer types. Like the findings in iPSCs, the SCNA distribution is related to replication timing in tumor cells. In particular, amplification boundaries tend to be located in early-replicated regions, whereas deletion boundaries are more likely to reside in late-replicated regions [93].