Vibrio cholerae is a gram-negative, highly motile, curved or comma-shaped rod with a single polar flagellum [1]. V. cholerae is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, mainly found in unhygienic environment. V. cholerae secretes enterotoxin that induces a life-threatening secretory diarrhea called cholera. Cholera is a major epidemic disease. The cholera toxin binds to the plasma membrane of intestinal epithelial cells and releases an enzymatically active subunit which causes a escalation in cyclic adenosine 5-monophosphate (cAMP) production. The resulted high cAMP level inside the cell causes massive secretion of electrolytes and water into the intestinal lumen. Other Vibrios may also be clinically significant for human and some are well-known to cause diseases in domestic animals as well. Nonpathogenic Vibrios are widely dispersed in the environment, mostly in estuarine waters and seafood's [2]. V. cholerae comprises nearly 200 serogroups based on the O antigenic structures [3]. Among them two serogroups of V. cholerae O1 and O139 cause widespread cholera epidemics [4]. The emergence in 1992 of a V. cholerae non-O1 serovar, labeled V. cholerae synonym O139 Bengal, in Bangladesh and India and its subsequent appearance in Southeast Asia, displacing V. cholerae O1 El Tor, was well known causative agent in the history of cholera [5]. In the autumn of 1993, V. cholerae serogroup O139 (Bengal), was implicated in outbreaks of cholera in Bangladesh and India. V. cholerae serogroup O139 (Bengal), causes characteristic severe cholera symptoms and has been implicated in a case of a traveler returning from India to the United States [6]. V. cholerae O139 serogroup strains showed susceptibility to 22 anti-bacterials in various regions of the world and an increase in resistant markers with resistance to fluoroquinolones [7].
During recent years, hundreds of bacterial genomes are available, while their annotation is of interest [8]. However, many of these protein functions are still unknown. For this reason, there is an increasing demand for the annotation of the functions of uncharacterized proteins, called "hypothetical proteins" [9], but the structures of which are known though. Structural genomics initiatives deliver plenty of structures of hypothetical proteins at a constantly growing rate. However, without function annotation, this huge structural storage is of little use to biologists who are interested in particular molecular systems. Additionally some of the proteins, which are known to be sound annotated, may have further functions beyond their listed archives. About half of the proteins in genomes are candidates for hypothetical proteins (HPs) [10]. Many of the "hypothetical proteins" occur in fact in more than one bacterial species, which increases the probability that they are indeed protein coding genes and not the consequence of erroneous gene predictions. Proteins that occur in diverse species can be combined into orthologous groups, which are known to be suitable for functional analyses and annotations of newly sequenced genomes [11].
Improving the functional annotation is of great importance for many follow up studies and we here apply computational tools for function prediction for one of the most devastating human pathogens V. cholerae O139, the causative agent of cholera especially in Southeast Asia. Therefore an improved functional annotation of its proteome is of particular urgency. The annotation of these HPs may be helpful as markers and pharmacological targets. With the overall faith that the majority of hypothetical proteins are the product of pseudogenes, it is necessary to have a tool with the capability of analyzing the minority of hypothetical proteins with a high probability of being expressed [10]. So far, there is no classification of HPs and functioning terms are swapping definitions of hypothetical proteins. Here, we combined physiochemical properties with protein-protein interaction (PPI) based function predictions. Our present study is mainly aimed to predict the structure, function and binding sites of these HPs which are important for docking studies for drug designing.