The analysis of viral metagenome data using bioinformatics is one of the most challenging aspects of viral metagenomics. One million to 1 billion reads of viral metagenomic sequences are typically generated by high-throughput sequencing platforms (with an average read length of 350-400 bp using 454 GS-FLX Titanium and 2 × 150 bp using Illumina HiSeq 2500). After removing any low-quality, redundant, and chimeric sequences, the viral sequences are compared to sequences in public databases (e.g., the GenBank non-redundant nucleotide database, MG-RAST, and CAMERA) using BLAST [25] or USEARCH [26]. The identification of viral sequences based on significant amino acid similarity (E-value of <10-3) was first described by Breitbart et al. [8], and it has since been extended to the exploration of environmental viromes, although the E-score applied to viral metagenomic studies appears to be regarded as "a loose standard" [27].
Most of the environmental viromes detected by viral metagenomics are defined as orphan (unassigned) sequences. The majority of viral sequences shares no amino acid similarity with previously observed genes (average 40% to 50%, occasionally up to 90%, of sequences); so, they are characterized as "unknown" [5]. Comparisons of viral sequences with the data in public databases have demonstrated that little is known about environmental viruses. Thus, the majority of the unassigned sequences in viral metagenomes is often regarded as "junk sequences" due to a lack of suitable bioinformatics tools and viral databases for their characterization [1, 28]. At present, the viral databases are biased toward animal and plant viruses, although viruses that infect prokaryotes (bacteriophages) are sparsely represented. Most of the latter are restricted to phages that infect bacteria belonging to the phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria [29, 30]. Moreover, even "known" viral sequences share low amino acid similarities (<50%) with viral protein sequences [9, 11, 13, 31]; so, the majority of environmental viruses representing novel viral species and their viral diversity is much greater than considered previously. The observation of a high percentage of ORFans (open reading frames with no homologs in known genes in the databases) in viral genomes [32] also supports the novelty of environmental viromes. Thus, researchers could discover novel viruses in orphan sequence pools that currently remain "untapped resources." These findings indicate our current lack of knowledge about viral genetic information and emphasize the need for physiological studies of viruses to understand viral ecology based on genomic data.