Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the movement of genetic material between different species of interkingdom, and lateral gene transfer is for intrakingdom movement [1]. The concept for gene transfer was first mentioned for an acquisition of virulence between bacterial strains [2], and then, transfers of multiple drug resistance between Shigellae and Escherichia coli strains were reported in Japan [3].
It is important to note that HGT not only affects correct reconstruction of a phylogenetic tree but also helps to understand reasons of its occurrence. In bacteria, it is widely known that genetic material of antibiotic resistance is transferred in the gastrointestinal tract [4], and in the case of unicellular eukaryotes, such as Giardia lamblia, Trichomonas vaginalis, and Entamoeba histolytica, the organisms that use fermentation or anaerobic metabolism in the low-oxygen environment overcame the environmental stress by taking genes from bacteria [5]. Moreover, the transferred gene plays a positive role in adaptation to a pathogenic way of life [6]. On the other hand, HGT has been criticized, in that its biological significance is overemphasized. If a gene has an essential role and participates in many interactions, its transfer might be less likely to occur than that of others or would be detrimental to the recipient. Thus, some transferred genes are considered nonfunctional [7-9].
Cryptosporidium is a parasitic protozoan of the phylum Apicomplexa. Among Cryptosporidium, C. parvum causes an infectious disease in humans and animals with diarrhea, called cryptosporidiosis. Although the disease is prevalent where water quality is poorly managed, there is no satisfactory treatment until now [10, 11].
Genome sequencing of C. parvum was completed in 2004, identifying major metabolic pathways through comparison with other parasites and also reporting those enzymes with high similarities to bacterial and plantal counterparts [12]. In some crucial biosynthesis pathways, C. parvum has enzymes that originated from various organisms, such as bacteria, plants, and algae. Phylogenomic analyses predicted a set of genes transferred from algae and eubacteria [13] and promising drug targets in nucleotide biosynthesis [14]. However, among 14 bacterial-like enzymes that were reported by Abrahamsen et al., only two enzymes received follow-up attention [15, 16].
CysQ, 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphatase, also known as 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS) 3'-phosphatase, or 3'(2'), 5'-bisphosphate nucleotidase, was among the 14 bacterial-like enzymes initially reported by the genome analysis. It has been thought that it is needed during aerobic growth in E. coli to help control the levels of PAPS in cysteine biosynthesis [17]. Recently, CysQ protein has been considered as an important regulator that modulates the sulfate assimilation pathway by affecting levels of intermediates in plants, fungi, and bacteria [18, 19]. Despite its biological importance, no follow-up phylogenetic analysis of CysQ in C. parvum has been reported.
In this study, we assumed that CysQ might have been transferred from bacteria to C. parvum by horizontal gene transfer. We constructed phylogenetic trees, based on a conserved domain of the protein, and inferred HGT from the phylogenetic incongruence.