Alternative splicing is an essential post-transcriptional process for creating various protein isoforms from the same gene. Approximately 60% of human genes have at least one alternative splice transcript [15]. Alternative splicing is regulated by mutations in genetic regions [3, 7, 14]. Most exons are flanked by the intronic dinucleotides GT (donor site) and AG (acceptor site), which are recognized by the spliceosome (Fig. 1A). Pre-mRNA is reconstructed only by joined exons with the removal of introns. However, mutations of these splice sites lead to aberrant splicing, producing exon skipping and different joining of exons to truncated or nonfunctional or dysfunctional proteins. It was reported that mutations of splice sites may play important roles in human disease, and longer proteins also tend to associate to various disease [16, 17].
In the case of the PAX6 gene, a 5' splice site mutation in intron 12 induces exon skipping in relation to autosomal dominant aniridia [18]. In the APC gene, abnormal splicing by a 3' splice site mutation in intron 3 causes exon 4 skipping due to a frameshift in hepatoblastoma [19]. A mutation in intron 25 of the ABCA3 gene creates novel 5' splice sites [20]. The spliceosome is known to recognize cryptic splice sites instead of typical splice sites. Noncanonical splice sites are GC-AG, GG-AG, GT-TG, GT-CG, AT-AG, GA-AG, GT-AC, and CT-AG (5'-3' splice sites) [21-23]. Mutations at the noncanonical splice site of the SEDL gene cause variants in X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda [24]. Additionally, less exon skipping and more intron retention by alternative splice sites are observed in cancer tissue compared to normal tissues from an analysis of expression sequence tags (ESTs) [25]. As a mutation of pre-mRNA, A to I RNA editing (conversion adenosine to inosine from deamination) also affects transcriptome diversification. RNA editing has regulatory roles, such as altering splice sites and sequences necessary for recognition of the spliceosome, resulting in modulation of alternatively spliced transcripts [26]. The last case of alternative splicing is by cis-genomic mutations in regulatory factors, such as branch sites, exonic and intronic splicing enhancers, and silencers [7, 27]. Pre-mRNA has exonic and intronic splicing enhancers (ESEs, ISEs) and silencers (ESSs, ISSs) that promote exon inclusion and exclusion by regulation of splice site recognition, respectively (Fig. 1A). The arginine-serine-rich (SR) protein that binds to ESEs induces splicing via a helping assembly spliceosome by interacting with snRNP. On the contrary, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein is bound to ESEs and ISEs and inhibits splice site recognition by blocking spliceosome assembly [15, 27-29]. Mutations in regulatory factor could disturb the binding of these spliceosome assembly-related proteins. Mutations at nucleotide positions 57 and 58 of the 174-bp-long exon 7 cause exon 7 skipping as a result of aberrant splicing by interrupted ESE-specific consensus sequences that are recognized by the SC35 and SF2/ASF SR proteins [10, 30]. Additionally, Ron, encoding the tyrosine kinase receptor for macrophage-stimulating protein, has alternative splice transcripts. It is regulated by overexpression of SF2/ASF binding to ESE and ISE in colon and breast cancer [31].
Alternative splicing is also known to be affected by epigenetic regulation, such as DNA methylation, histone modification, and chromatin structure (Fig. 1B). The relationship between chromatin structure and alternative splicing is still in a maze, but association studies are gradually increasing genomewide [32-34]. Hisone modifications are enriched in exons rather than introns and related to exon expression, especially H3K36me3, H3K79me1, H2BK5me1, H3K27me1, H3K27me2, and H3K27me3 [35, 36]. H3K36me3 marking in exons is found in weakly expressed, alternatively spliced exons, indicating that histone modification has a relation to transcription via splicing-related marking mechanisms [36, 37]. These histone marks could recruit splicing regulators with chromatin binding proteins and affect mRNA splicing [33]. Additionally, hisone acethylation could modulate splicing rates to react quickly to changing conditions with increased RNA polymerase II processivity, and spliceosome rearrangements are affected by histone acetylation [38]. Nevertheless, although there is little evidence, DNA methylation has been reported to have a relationship with splice sites. CpG dinucleotides are distributed nonrandomly in the genome. Exon skipping and mutually exclusive exons have significantly lower levels of both CG and mCG in the exonic regions, whereas intron retention has significantly higher levels of CG in both exonic and intronic regions [34]. A DNA-binding protein, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), was inhibited by a methylation event of CD45 exon 5 [39]. These epigenetic features are strongly associated with alternative splicing. Furthermore, these mechanisms are known to be changed according to cell type and disease states. Especially, in cancer, the epigenetic regulation of chromatin structure effects aberrant gene expression by alternative splicing in cancer [1, 7, 8].
Taken together, gene expression via alternative splicing is altered by complicated and mutual mechanisms, from genetic to epigenetic regulation. Therefore, it casts light on the understanding of cancer mechanisms by an investigation of alternative splicing patterns.