The development of electronic medical record (EMR) systems began as a means to document clinical activities for in-patients and out-patients [1]. They have evolved as the primary front-line patient care clinical tool for medical professionals. The completion of the Human Genome Project opened the era of research in genomics and proteomics. Genome research provides keys to understanding the mechanisms of disease. In clinical informatics, the widespread adoption of the EMR system has generated large amounts of heterogeneous clinical data-some structured and others unstructured. In addition, the explosive health-related contents from online communities, mobile applications, and electronic personal health records increased the availability of non-traditional data on individual activities and life style [2]. In genetics, since the completion of the Human Genome Project in 2003, the acquisition, analysis, and presentation of whole-genomic data has become faster, cheaper, and more reliable day by day [3]. Such dramatic technological advances affect the development of new prevention, diagnosis, and treatment patterns for routine clinical care. The massive amount of heterogeneous data from two different domains is expected to provide personalized, preventive, and predictive healthcare services in the near future [4].
Integrated use of EMR and bioinformatics is beginning to influence the changes in the research paradigm-that is, rapid introduction of new concepts into the point of care. Dr. Want used clinical bioinformatics (CBI) with the definition of "the clinical application of bioinformatics-associated sciences and technologies to understand molecular mechanisms and potential therapies for human disease" [5]. CBI aims to deal with the challenge of integrating genomic and clinical data to accelerate the translation of knowledge into effective treatment plan development and personalized prescription. It is to assist clinicians in various ways, including new biomarker discovery, identification of genotype and phenotype correlations, and pharmacogenomics at the point of care.
Biomedical informatics is a more popular term. Biomedical informatics is defined as an emerging, multi-disciplinary field, and it is the integration of the computational methods and diverse technologies used in life science research, such as genomics, proteomics, systems biology, computer sciences, and healthcare applications, such as electronic health records (EHRs) [6]. The adoption of EMRs enables one to conduct comprehensive phenotypic-genotypic association studies using the genotypes obtained from whole genome sequencing of a given cohort in combination with the phenome data of the same population, as available in the EMR database, as shown in Fig. 1.
The major challenge in enabling such convergent research is to provide easy storage, user-friendly visualization, speedy analysis, knowledge generation, and presentation of clinically relevant information at the point of care. Relevant information should be extracted and linked with medical records in a clinically applicable manner. The convergence of discovery research for clinical implementation can only be accomplished through stringent data management, analysis, interpretation, and quantification in a multidisciplinary research environment. In addition, since genetic information can be easily identifiable, ethical issues, such as informed consent and stewardship over this database, also should be considered as the data grow. The communities of EMRs and bioinformatics (BI) have different histories. While the EMR community focused on clinical activities and clinical workflows, the BI community originated from the biological research community, which included physicists, computer scientists, statisticians, and clinical researchers. What are the optimal ways to integrate the tremendous advances in BI into routine clinical work? In this paper, we will primarily focus on the informatics aspects of this large question by identifying opportunities, challenges, and approaches for the ultimate goal of providing the best care possible for our patients and the population.