The genomics era has opened in earnest with the completion of the Human Genome Project. With the development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, the amount of genomics data has exploded, and sequencing targets have become very diverse. As of 2017, there are 7,930 species of eukaryotes, 192,677 species of bacteria, and 1,412 species of archaea that have been officially registered in NCBI. As the Nagoya Protocol is initiated, it is expected that these numbers will continue to increase in the future due to the policies of each country to secure information on biological genetic resources [1, 2]. Despite the fact that the cost of genomic analysis is declining, there are still a number of technical problems that make it difficult to sequence the genome completely [3]. For example, misassembly due to the inherent limitations of NGS technology is well known [4–6]. Especially in plants, there are many barriers that make plant genomes hard to sequencing, such as Numts, repeats, and genome duplication events [7–9].
Genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) is a technology that allows high-throughput genotyping by applying NGS technology. It is used to analyze single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in populations to find molecular markers that are related to phenotype and genotype or to draw genetic linkage maps for plant breeding. By analyzing the pattern of GBS data along each chromosome, one can find out where the gene crossover occurs. On the other hand, a small block that interrupts an otherwise continuous GBS pattern is genetically non-ideal and implies a misassembled region. Therefore, we explored the application of GBS in the detection of misassemblies [10–12].
Brassicaceae is a mustard family containing 372 genera and 4,060 accepted species, and its varieties are cultivated as economically valuable crops not only in East Asia but also globally [13]. The triangle of U theory states that the differentiation of an allotetraploid of Brassica species—Brassica juncea (AABB), Brassica napus (AACC), and Brassica carinata (BBCC)—occurs due to the polyploidization of diploid Brassica species: Brassica rapa (AA), Brassica nigra (BB), and Brassica oleracea (CC). This theory has been proven by genomic analysis by NGS of Brassica species [14–25]. Research on the correlation between the genetic information and the nutrient content of crops has been actively conducted in Brassica genomes [26]. The recently published B. rapa V2.1 genome sequence shows much improved quality, as well as a number of misassembly corrections over the previous version, V1.5 [17]. This offers an interesting opportunity to test the potential of misassembly detection, based on GBS data.
In this study, we propose a user-friendly pipeline, called misMM, which automatically identifies misassembled candidate blocks (MCBs) and adjacent to destination blocks (ADBs) and plots the genetic map of MCBs by using raw GBS data sorted by MadMapper [27]. These results are verified by using the BAC end-sequence library published in NCBI and the gene synteny relation between Arabidopsis thaliana and B. rapa [28–31].