The availability of genome wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips has made it possible to study the linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns, effective population size (Ne), genome wide associations, etc. easily and effectively. Whole genome SNP panels are widely being used to study the genetic diversity in different livestock breeds [123]. LD and Ne form an important part in understanding the genetic diversity of any breed. Present day breeds are a result of adaptation and extensive selection for favorable traits. So, studying effective population size of breeds over several generations helps in understanding the genetic history and selection pressures that the population might have undergone in the history. Effective population size is particularly important in population and quantitative genetics and in evolutionary and conservation biology as it determines the rate at which genetic variation is lost [4].
Korean cattle are taurine type cattle available across the mainland and nearby islands. There are three main cattle breeds in Korea viz., Brown Hanwoo (BH), Brindle Hanwoo (BNH), and Jeju Black (JB). BH is the main cattle breed of Korea and has an established breeding and selection program. The number of BH runs in millions whereas the other two breeds have few thousand animals only. A close relative of BH called Yanbian (YB) also exists close to the Korea and China border [5]. So, we included the YB breed in the study as it is the unselected breed and would provide a direct comparison between the selected Korean breeds and unselected breeds. Korean cattle are known to have migrated from North China and Mongolia and from Korea to Japan. Considering this fact we conducted this study to understand the LD patterns and the effective population size of the Korean breeds along with Chinese, Mongolian (MG), and Japanese breeds. It is already known that due to various reasons about 16% of the cattle breeds are already extinct and 30% face the risk of extinction. Understanding the LD and Ne in Korean cattle population will allow the researchers to make better strategies for conservation and breeding of these cattle.