Analysis of requirements
It is necessary to analyze the complicated requirements of the system to design and develop the IABio platform service. Because security is very important to a medical information system, it requires user identification. In addition, the data exchange method, integrated data composition, and services should be specified.
User identification
It is needed to analyze patients' genomic data concerning IA for treatment and prevention and to provide them with customized service. To do so, an integrated data analysis system is required and should work with all genomic information. Users with access to IABio are classified into gene researcher, protein researcher, brain imaging researcher, senior researcher for integrated work, and server manager. Each manager has access to a patient's genome information according to the Medical Care Act, but the researcher is limited to only 'concerned' information and can not have access to other information. However, all of the researchers can have access to the risk outcome that is yielded from the integrated analysis of all genomic information. The integrated analysis risk results do not include individual patient information but are considered new information and thus are not against the Medical Care Act. Therefore, each researcher can search, enter data, and modify genomic data he manages and can search out integrated analysis outcomes.
Standard-based biological data exchange
To subdivide access from each researcher, access control is needed or else the server manager can not even read the genomic data. Therefore, a server manager can only control information that the genome manager has access to. To do so, the authorization server and IABio server have to be separated physically. Medical information standard-based guidelines and access control are necessary for authorization and approval.
Integrated biological data platform
Biological data (gene, protein, and brain structure image) have different identifier values. However, if several pieces of genomic data for one patient have more than one identifier, it is against data integrity, because information for one patient is duplicated. In addition, because genome information entered by each data manager is created in different systems, an identification system is needed.
Web portal service
Access to an integrated database requires an accessible service and web portal service in which the authorization and approval procedure has been established, which is necessary to search data related to a genome. Therefore, it is necessary to provide an integrated service using a security system suitable for medical standards. Accordingly, a web portal is designed using OAuth 2.0.
Provision of data analysis output
IA risk factors should be provided through integrated analysis based on data entered by each researcher and user. Integrated information should be provided for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and protein markers related to IA. Also, the accuracy of risk factors should advance enough to utilize a diagnostic index. After risk factors that are highly relevant to IA are determined through the integrated analysis of several areas in the genome, a risk evaluation score for the respective factor should be provided.
To compose such a sophisticated system, our study uses medical standard guidelines in designing the genome database platform.