For a last decade, mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic technologies have emerged as a core technology to measure protein expression and the sites with post-translational modifications (PTMs) on large scales. However, MS-based proteome analysis has been possible for only a limited number of proteins and also limited in accurately detecting low abundant proteins and the peptides with low abundant PTMs [1234]. Recent advances in high-resolution peptide separation, comprehensive fractionation, and high performance MS considerably improved the proteome size and depth (increased numbers of proteins and PTM sites measured) and also the accuracy in quantitative information of proteomic data (abundances of proteins and PTM sites) [5]. Moreover, MS-based proteome analysis required large amounts of samples to measure reliably proteins and PTM sites. To resolve this problem, the methods for serial enrichments of different PTMs from the same sample have been developed to significantly reduce the sample amount required [6]. These advanced MS-based proteomic technologies have facilitated the generation of proteome and PTM profiles in tissue and body fluid (plasma/serum, urine, ascites, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, saliva, and tear) samples collected from the patients with a broad spectrum of human diseases.
Comparative proteomic analysis of samples from the patients and healthy control subjects is commonly applied to identify protein biomarker candidates [78910]. In this analysis, proteome profiles are first obtained for tissue or body fluid samples collected from the patients with a target disease and also healthy subjects, and the proteins showing altered abundances, called differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), in disease samples, compared to control samples are then identified (discovery phase) [10]. In the protein biomarker discovery platforms, about hundred DEPs are selected as an initial set of biomarker candidates, and their altered expression are then verified in a small cohort of the patients, which is independent to the patients used in the discovery phase (verification phase) [5]. However, the number of DEPs is often larger than 100, and how to select the initial set of biomarker candidates is not straightforward, although fold-changes and/or associations of the DEPs with pathophysiological processes in the target disease can be used as the criteria for selection of the initial set of biomarker candidates. Next, for the initial candidates whose disease-related alterations in their abundances were confirmed in the small cohort during the verification phase, their validity as biomarkers is tested in a large cohort of the patients (validation phase) [5]. Finally, the biomarker candidates whose altered expression was confirmed in the large cohort are selected as the final set of biomarkers.
Recently, a number of studies have reported that cellular pathways can serve as better indicators of disease states than individual molecules [11121314151617]. Pathway enrichment analysis provides a list of cellular pathways enriched by the DEPs, and a set of cellular pathways related to pathophysiological processes can be then selected as altered cellular pathways in the target disease. Next, we can focus on a subset of DEPs that are involved in the selected cellular pathways. Furthermore, network analysis for this subset of DEPs enables effective identification of key molecules that represent the selected cellular pathways as protein biomarker candidates. Using this approach, an initial set of biomarker candidates can be selected more effectively than the conventional criteria, such as fold-changes and associations of the DEPs with the target disease. Thus, several network-based approaches to identify disease-related cellular pathways and representative proteins of such pathways have been developed. In this review, we summarize bioinformatics methods for network-based protein biomarker discovery and also key components in these network-based methods.