Membrane proteins play crucial roles in organismal transduction of information. Molecular recognition in biological membrane systems is the initial process triggering external factors to be passed into the inner part of a cell. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which consist of 7 transmembrane segments, play pivotal roles for signal transduction in higher eukaryotes and organize the largest families of proteins in the human genome [1]. The fact that drugs targeting GPCRs constitute over one-third of pharmaceuticals shows the importance of GPCRs as drug targets [2].
Adenosine receptors (AdoRs) belong to a family of rhodopsin-like class A GPCRs, which constitute the largest portion of GPCRs in humans, including olfactory receptors, and there are four known subtypes of AdoRs-namely, AdoR1, AdoRA2A, AdoRA2B, and AdoR3 [3, 4]. Although these AdoR subtypes have distinct amino acid sequences and tissue-specific distribution, their endogenous agonist and ligand-binding pockets are highly conserved.
The biogenic nucleoside adenosine (Fig. 1) exerts its effects by interacting with AdoRs that are involved in various diseases, such as cardiac ischemia, arrhythmia, neurodegeneration, diabetes, glaucoma, and inflammation [5]. The physiological effects of AdoRs can be used for diagnoses and planning of the surgical strategies, such as in coronary artery diseases [6].
Olfaction, the sense of smell, is also mediated by class A GPCRs-namely, olfactory receptors. The fundamental mechanism of olfaction is now under some controversy [7-9]. Various attempts were introduced to describe the molecular mechanism of receptor-ligand recognition in olfaction, such as the binding theory and vibration theory [10-12]. The former, where the specificity of ligand is explained by molecular shape, has been developed into a concept of a pharmacophore and is generally accepted by researchers. Nevertheless, this is not sufficient to give the account of ligand variety and agonism complexity of GPCRs.
In recent decades, there have been many efforts to find an efficient way to seek or make appropriate ligands working on the target receptors through a chemogenomic approach. Application of molecular descriptors can make an efficient way to discriminate ligand binding modes in receptor-ligand relationships in such cases as in silico chemogenomic screening [13]. Molecular descriptors encoding information about the molecular structure can be classified by the dimensionality of their molecular representation, and they are almost on the structural, topological, and geometrical bases [14]. They are also including information on dipole moment, electric polarizability, and electrostatic potential in their data types.
Lately, a computational approach was carried out to search for a molecular vibration-activity relationship in the agonism of histamine receptors, and the author suggested that the molecular vibrational frequency pattern may play a role as a possible molecular descriptor for histamine receptor ligands [15]. The EigenVAlue (EVA) descriptor is also based on infrared range molecular vibrations among the various molecular descriptors and is a unique one, based on eigenvalues corresponding to individual calculated normal modes among various molecular descriptors [16, 17].
In the present paper, we tested the potential of the corralled intensity of molecular vibrational frequency (CIMVF) [15] as a molecular descriptor, compared to the EVA descriptor and other descriptors for the classification of AdoR ligands.