Type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus is a major health problem worldwide. In case of type 1 diabetes, the body is unable to produce insulin due to the autoimmune destruction of the beta-cells in the pancreas [1], and insulin injection is the only known preventive measure in this case [2]. Most of the anti-diabetic drugs of synthetic origin have serious adverse effects; therefore, phytochemicals and plant extracts with anti-diabetic properties have been tested both in vivo and in vitro as alternatives for diabetic treatments [3]. Phytochemicals, such as curcumin (Curcuma longa), genistein (Genista tinctoria), piperine (Piper nigrum), and pterostilbene (Vitis vinifera), are reported to have potent anti-diabetic properties. Curcumin, when tested in diabetic animals, exhibited a good sign for the prevention and treatment of diabetic encephalopathy [4]. Genistein also plays important roles in the regulation of glucose homeostasis in type 1 diabetes by down-regulating G6Pase, PEPCK, fatty acid β-oxidation, and carnitine palmitoyl transferase activities while up-regulating malic enzyme and glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase activities in the liver, with preservation of pancreatic β-cells. The supplementation of genistein is helpful for preventing insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus onset [5] and piperine, an alkaloid, has also been reported to possess potential anti-diabetic effects [6]. Experimental results suggested the antiglycemic effects of pterostilbene in an induced rat model of hyperglycemia. Therefore, the antioxidant and antihyperglycemic activities of pterostilbene may confer a protective effect in preventing diabetes [7]. Several receptors (insulin-like growth factor receptor, glucose transporter, and kir6.2) and their associated signaling pathways have been elucidated and are involved in glucose regulation and diabetes. But, a significant gap still remains as to making the choice of the drug against the target receptor in the disease condition. Kir6.2, a major subunit of the ATP-sensitive K+ channel, an inward-rectifying potassium ion channel, is an integral membrane protein that allows K+ to flow from the outside of the cell to the inside, which is controlled by G-proteins associated with sulfonylurea receptor (SUR), to constitute the ATP-sensitive K+ channel. During glycolysis, an increase in the ATP/ADP ratio blocks KATP channels, causing membrane depolarization, and helps in opening the voltage-dependent calcium channel, which facilitates the influx of calcium, triggering the exocytosis of insulin. Mutations in the two subunits of SUR1 and kir6.2 result in the opening of the pancreatic KATP channel and permanent closing of the calcium channel, thus blocking insulin exocytosis. Mutations in KCNJ11, the gene encoding the channel, are reported to be associated with congenital hyperinsulinism [8, 9]. Ten possible mutations affecting the regular mechanism of kir6.2 [8, 10, 11] have been identified as probable causes of type 1 diabetes. Due to the unavailability of the crystal structure of kir6.2 protein, an attempt was made here to predict both the secondary and tertiary structures using in silico approach. The objective of the current investigation is to describe atomic interactions and the inhibitory effect between both wild-type and mutant models of kir6.2 with phytochemicals, such as curcumin, genistein, piperine, and pterostilbene, computationally.