The completion of the human genome project has accelerated the development of many omics technologies that have been used extensively for the genomewide profiling of human samples [1]. Public repositories, such as Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and ArrayExpress, now hold data on hundreds of thousands of samples profiled by diverse technologies [23]. For many of the samples in the public repositories, various kinds of clinical information are also included so that interested researchers can use them for their own research interests.
While these public data have enormous potential for research use, it is inevitable that unknown errors may creep into public datasets without being noticed by depositors. For example, Microsoft Excel is notorious for its automatic conversion function, which erroneously changes tens of human gene symbols [4]. But, the errors are not limited to gene symbols and may occur in the clinical information, as well.
Age and gender are some of the most basic clinical information associated with human samples and are most unlikely to be erroneous during data acquisition. While they are basic clinical information, the importance of age and gender in human biology is not trivial. There is strong evidence that men and women differ in terms of development and severity of many common diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, autoimmune diseases, and asthma [5]. Recent clinical studies have revealed an association between several genetic diseases and gender-specific genetic patterns [67].
While analyzing public datasets produced using Infinium 450K HumanMethylation arrays (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) and Affymetrix Human Genome U133Plus 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA), we found many samples that were discordant between clinical gender information and the patterns of gender-specific markers. Importantly, the errors were not limited to a few datasets but were prevalent in many datasets produced by many different laboratories. We advise that the users of public datasets should not expect that these data are error-free and, whenever possible, that they check the consistency of data.