Genomic CNVs can contribute to the etiologies of DD, ID, ASDs, and MCAs. With its proven diagnostic yield, CMA has been recommended by a number of professional societies as part of the standard assessment for individuals in whom the underlying cause is unclear [10, 11].
Evaluating genomic variants identified by CMA is time-consuming and difficult. Variations in their interpretat ion are not uncommon due to platform differences (e.g., resolution and array design), lack of standardization, and differences in the resources that are available to and the expertise of the bioinformatics team and clinicians [12].
At the time of writing, South Korea’s National Health Insurance (NHI) does not recognize CMA as a medically necessary test nor does it subsidize the cost of CMA testing. NHI allows only multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification tests for four microdeletion syndromes: Angelman/Prader-Willi syndrome, DiGeorge syndrome, Miller-Dieker syndrome, and Williams syndrome [13]. Although subsidies for NGS genetic testing have received government approval this year, NGS tests are limited to a small number of pre-approved diagnostic gene panels. With NGS in the early stages of clinical application in this country due to government restrictions and due to insufficient human bioinformatics resources and lack of a central system for a nationwide interlaboratory QA program and data sharing, there is currently no affordable high-resolution, high-throughput diagnostic genetic test for CNVs available to the public in South Korea.
One major limitation of this study is that due to the costs of CMA, we were unable to investigate the families of the probands to confirm the clinical significance of some detected CNVs. Other limitations were associated with the sensitivity and specificity of the chosen CMA testing platform; low-level mosaicism and balanced rearrangements might not be detected [14]. For example, in patient 26, FISH revealed a derivative chromosome 15 resulting from a translocation between chromosomes 9 and 15.
This study illustrates the ability of CMA to greatly improve the diagnostic yield (66.7%) for patients with unexplained DD, ID, ASDs, and MCAs. However, it is also important to note that the clinical impact of CMA beyond the diagnosis is very limited. It is unlikely that any genomic genetic test will lead to better clinical outcomes for adults with DD, ID, ASDs, and MCAs, because the genetic diagnosis often does not lead to an intervention strategy for adult patients. Nevertheless, the diagnosis will influence the parents’ reproductive planning, assist genetic counselors in assessing recurrence risks and providing guidance to the patients’ families, and ultimately help reduce childhood morbidity and mortality. Therefore, we recommend the introduction and recognition of CMA as the first-tier diagnostic genetic test in South Korea.