Group lasso
Statistical association tests above should be conducted to each gene or each genetic region one at a time, so the individual tests cannot consider genetic correlations among genes. But, genes linked with each other on genetic pathways or genes that have an interaction effects on a phenotype outcome can have a functional relationship with each other. Since their correlations could be important information for genetic association studies, a statistical model that can includes all of genetic information is often preferred. Regularization procedures can be conducted to entire genomes in a regression framework, where a phenotype outcome is regressed on all of genetic data. The solution of regression coefficients can be achieved, constraining the parameter space of regression coefficients. This constraint actually enables to obtain the coefficient solution even if the number of genes is much greater than a sample size. Depending on the parameter space constraint, a type of regularization procedure is determined. Group lasso regularizes regression coefficients such that the sum of L2 norm of the coefficients for each group is less than an arbitrary value [7]. The arbitrary value is corresponding to a tuning parameter value for sparsity. For a fixed tuning parameter λ, the estimated regression coefficients β=(β1,β2,…,βm)T of group lasso maximizes Qλβ= −lβ+λ∑k=1mmkβk2, where l(β) is a logistic likelihood, and mk is the total number of genetic sites of the k-th gene, i.e., βk=(βk1, βk2,…,βkmk)T. The L2 norm of βk is defined as βk2= ∑j=1mkβkj2.
In genomic data analysis with a group structure, group lasso sequentially selects the most outcome-related gene or genetic region. The selection results rely on the tuning parameter value λ since we have different coefficient estimates for a value of λ. As λ decreases, the number of selected genes is gradually increased. In general, we select the k-th gene if the estimated regression coefficients βk are nonzero. In group lasso, the estimated regression coefficients of all genetic sites belong to selected genes or genetic regions are nonzero while all genetic sites of unselected genes or genetic regions have the exactly zero regression coefficients. Therefore, group selection can be performed based on the solution of regression coefficients for a fixed value of λ. Note that the numerical values of estimated coefficients βk are not of interest since group lasso performs selection but not prediction. That is, we see if βk = 0 or not.
In our simulation studies and real data analysis, we first started with a relatively large λ value which is large enough that the solution to all regression coefficients can be exactly zero. In this case, no genes are selected. We then gradually decreased the value of λ until a single gene has nonzero regression coefficients of its genetic sites. This gene is considered as the top rank gene. In the same way, we can find the second ranked gene as λ continues to be decreasing. Eventually, we can obtain a list of top ranked genes. Since we compared a particular number of top selected genes with the same number of top significant genes computed by multiple testing procedures, we didn't need to find the optimal λ value in the simulation studies and real data analysis. Group lasso has been widely applied for analysis of high-dimensional genomic data [816]. We used an R package ‘gglasso’ for simulation studies and real data analysis.