Gastritis is a common disease in Korea. There is a report that 9.9% of Koreans have gastritis [1]. Gastritis is associated with the potential risk of developing gastric cancer or peptic ulcer disease [2]. A common cause of gastritis is Helicobacter pylori infection [3]. However, in addition to the cause, other genetic and genomic factors have been examined for gastritis. Human leukocyte antigen class II allele is an important risk factor for chronic atrophic gastritis and gastric carcinoma in Koreans [4]. Moreover, many studies have reported that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), including rs1143627 in interleukin-1 beta (IL1B), rs4073 in interleukin 8 (IL8), rs4986790 in Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and rs16260 in cadherin-1 (CDH1), are associated with susceptibility to gastric diseases, especially gastric cancer [5, 6, 7, 8].
The results from SNP studies show the importance of research for the association between SNP and disease, based on the association and functional relationship between gastritis and gastric carcinoma [9]. In other words, a casual SNP in one disease may be a genetic factor for another disease. However, previous studies only targeted the effect from each single variation; results have been rarely obtained for high-order genetic interactions in gastritis from genome-wide association (GWA) studies to date.
In this study, we performed a GWA case-control study for gastritis using SNP genotype data of the Korea Associated Resource (KARE) project [10]. Our study was focused on detecting significant epistatic SNP-SNP interactions and the resulting gene-gene interactions that are putative causal factors in gastritis. A validation and functional analysis of the result was performed on the obtained relevance gene-gene epistasis network.
Our network construction method is based on the previous relevance network approach [11]. To measure the strength of the association between a pair of SNPs and gastritis, we used the mutual information that has shown to be effective in detecting epistasis in case-control GWA studies [12, 13]. An efficient permutation scheme was adopted to extract significant interaction pairs, and we also approximated the p-values by exploiting the relationship between the mutual information value and the χ2 value [14]. We further transformed this SNP network into a relevant gene-gene epistasis network to validate the biological significance of our findings. A functional analysis was performed on the gene-gene network, and the topological properties of the network were also investigated.