The standard and definition of IHEC epigenome project
Tissue and cell standard
The normal phenotype of a sample should be macroscopically and microscopically confirmed by at least two pathologists. To monitor the cell quality, RNA quality should be assessed by RNA integrity number (RIN). The value is expected to exceed 8 (cell lines) or 4 (cells isolated from primary tissues) and should be described as the sample information. The purity of cells whose epigenome is analyzed must be assessed by immunocytochemistry, cell sorting, or other methods. The cell purity is expected to exceed 90%. However, if this is practically difficult, the purity of a sample should be described as the sample information. For optimal ChIP results, it is recommended to use more than 1 × 106 cells per chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Definition of IHEC epigenome set
The IHEC epigenome set consists of methylome (Bisulfite-seq [required], methylated DNA immunoprecipitation-seq [MeDIP-seq], methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme-seq [MRE-seq], reduced representation bisulphite-seq [RRBS], methylation capturing-seq [methylCap-seq] [any of 4 required on Roadmap]), RNA (RNA-seq, RNA-ChIP [required to Roadmap], smRNA-seq [optional]), ChIP-seq [input, H3K27me3, H3K36me3, H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H3K9me3], and chromatin accessibility (DNaseI hypersensitivity, digital genomic footprinting, FAIRE-seq [any 3 optional]) (Table 3) [6].
Definition of IHEC metadata
Metadata standards are the data-related information required for data integration produced from individual IHEC institutions. It consists of 3 components: data standards, assay standards, and programmatic interoperability and programming interfaces, such as Representational State Transfer Application Programing Interfaces (REST APIs), allowing programs (apps) to pull data and metadata together from various sources across the web. Metadata standards allow computer programs and end users to access essential information about performed experiments, such as the information about assays, samples assayed, and algorithms used to produce interpretable data. In the preparatory stage, the project was to complete a case study in data and software integration using the Genboree system [6]. Several standards have yet to be defined, particularly controlled vocabularies and ontologies for important data elements, such as sample types, disease conditions, and phenotypes [6].
Definition of IHEC data ecosystem standard
The IHEC data ecosystem project is to provide the infrastructure of data repositories and resources that enable data sharing by working together for the collection, processing, storage, and distribution of data from IHEC. Data are normally submitted to the central data repository site by individual data producers. Processed IHEC data, such as peak calls and epigenome maps, may not be deposited in a central data repository and may be only made available directly by the data distribution component (local) of the data ecosystem. There is value in distributing both the raw and processed data, and both will be provided. A virtual data integration center will be conceived in developing an IHEC data sharing system, and a joint project with a metadata standard project will be done in the near future [6, 7].