The central dogma of molecular biology can simply be summarized as follows: mRNA molecules are transcribed based on DNA sequences and translated into protein molecules. However, the detailed mechanisms and regulation are very complex in many aspects. One of the aspects is related to the redundancy of the genetic code. Due to the redundancy, an amino acid can be translated from multiple kinds of codons; so, a single-nucleotide variant/mutation may result in missense mutation but also a synonymous one, depending on its locus. Furthermore, the genomes of a variety of organisms do not use synonymous codons evenly, and the quantity of the bias is different in distinct organisms. Somehow, a synonymous variant is often considered to be silent, non-harmful, and less significant. However, the interest in issues of synonymous mutations is increasing in such fields as medical sciences, genetics, as well as molecular evolution [1–4], as it was revealed that they can affect protein levels, structures, and functions by changing mRNA structures [5] and creating alterations in splicing [6], spliceosomes [7], and miRNA sites [8].
Another important functional effect of a synonymous mutation is that it changes a tRNA, which is a counter-partner of a codon in mRNA, and the abundance of distinct tRNAs, even though transferring the same amino acid. This may affect the speed of translation [9] and protein folding [10]. Thus, from the level of each codon in the mRNA to whole organisms, a measure to reflect translational efficiency based on tRNA abundance should be required. For this purpose, a new metric, the tRNA adaptive index (tAI), was suggested by dos Reis et al. [11], which differs from previously used measures, such as the codon usage index and the codon adaptive index (CAI) [12], in that the tAI is calculated with intracellular tRNA abundance.
To calculate the tAI, parameters that represent the codon-anticodon’s wobble interactions are used to anticipate tRNA abundances, and the values were inferred by gene expression profiles in budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) in the first version of tAI [12]. However, because the efficiency of the wobble interaction was expected to be different with respect to different species [13], the weights were not adequate for non-yeast organisms. Despite the need for species-specific weights, the tAI was widely used in various kinds of research [14–16] for a while, because the calculation of species-specific values needed gene expression profiles of whole transcriptomes.
To overcome this limitation, Sabi and Tuller (2014) [13] invented a new metric, the species-specific tAI (stAI), using the tRNA copy number of each species, the rationale for which was based on the fact that a higher level of gene expression is related to higher codon usage and adaptation to intracellular tRNAs. As expected, stAI showed better performance than tAI in the prediction of protein abundances in non-fungal organisms [13]. After the metric was introduced, a web server (stAIcalc), including an online tool that calculates the stAI of query sequences of a selected organism and downloadable stand-alone software, was published [17]. However, the server does not provide pre-calculated stAI values. For greater convenience, we here introduce our web database, Species-specific tRNA adaptive index compendium (http://stadium.pmrc.re.kr), which provides stAI values of 148 genomes.