The medical oncologist who was in charge of him tested for EGFR mutation and ALK by fluorescence in situ hybridization to see rearrangements of ALK. Tests showed no EGFR mutation and no ALK translocation. He chose cytotoxic chemotherapy with pemetrexed and cisplatin according to the double-negative results of the EGFR and ALK tests.
The ultimate goal of the clinical application of cancer genomics should be therapeutics. There are increasing gene lists for NSCLC that have matching targeted agents [26, 27], but many patients do not have genetic alterations that can be a target. Even for the same type of cancer-for example, lung adenocarcinoma-the genetic make-up is very heterogeneous. The accurate definition of the genetic make-up of each patient will be the first step for personalized medicine. Many target panels have been developed by many vendors and hospitals for commercial or non-commercial use [3], but the usage is still very limited. As more cancer genome data are available [28, 29], the list of target panels will increase and be specified to tumor types.
Now, we have two targeted agents to prolong the survival of lung cancer patients: the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) erlotinib or gefitinib for EGFR mutations and the ALK TKI crizotinib for ALK translocations. For this case, there was no targeted agent, because he did not have EGFR or ALK alterations. Based on the histology of his tumor, he was treated with pemetrexed and cisplatin [30]. Despite the substantial toxicity of cytotoxic chemotherapy, many patients are prescribed these drugs with the individualized possibility of this agent not known. This decision relies on population data from large-scale prospective trials. Because clinical trials targeting specific genetic alterations are increasing, the clinical need for more genetic information is also increasing [31].
If the patient was diagnosed as stage IV initially, the amount of tissue for genetic testing is very limited. The amount of tissue is enough for 2 or 3 genetic tests. For these patients, multiplexing or NGS technologies have important advantages to overcome the limitation of tissue amounts in the clinic.
This patient got adjuvant chemotherapy with NP for 4 cycles but progressed 6 months after the completion. We guess that the patient did not benefit from NP for 4 cycles. The usual speculation is whether there is a better way to choose adjuvant treatment. The way to increase the benefit of adjuvant treatment could be the application of variable adjuvant treatment that is selected from individualized factors. Personalized cancer genomic analysis can show different and private profiles of individual cancers, and accumulation of these genomic data enables different adjuvant treatment strategies for each patient.
Despite the theoretical promise of personalized cancer genomic analysis for the selection of the right drug, there are few examples of this direct application of cancer genomics. One of important example is the story of Lukas Wartman, a doctor at Washington University in St. Louis [32]. He suffered from a second relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and sequenced the tumor DNA and RNA. He found very high expression of FLT3 and then figured out that sunitinib, a kidney cancer drug, could block tumor survival signals. Sunitinib induced complete remission in him, and thereafter, he received allogeneic stem cell transplantation and is now in remission. Another story from the Fox Chase Cancer Center was reported on KIT mutations from a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor [33]. The patient had an advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor and sequenced his tumor using a cancer panel. He had a KIT mutation and was treated with imatinib, a well-known KIT inhibitor that is not approved for his tumor, for more than 2 years. If he had been in in routine practice without cancer panel sequencing, he would have died without imatinib treatment.
A pharmacogenomic approach could be used to minimize toxicity to cancer treatment, too. In this case, we usually see germline SNP data. Some germline SNPs are already known to predict erratic side effects to specific drugs. One example is the UGT1A1 germline polymorphism for the metabolism and toxicity of irinotecan. If the patient has a homozygous polymorphism in the UGT1A1 gene-the *28 variant-he should be prescribed with a dose reduction to avoid severe, sometimes fatal, toxicity from irinotecan. A genomic approach is required to properly assess pharmacogenomics in association with drug toxicity. A commercial chip, the Affymetric DMET chip, covers 25-32% of genes of pharmacogenomics, and it is an important question whether more coverage with WES will be more beneficial.
He was treated with pemetrexed and cisplatin for 4 cycles, and his tumor shrank with the treatment. But, his tumor rebounded, with a complaint of dyspnea and cough, 4 months after the completion of treatment. After 4 cycles of second-line chemotherapy with docetaxel, he had stable disease.
Even in the case of a dramatic response to the first-line treatment, nearly all cancers rebound with various relapse-free durations [30, 34]. The choice of second-line treatment depends on clinical guidelines, clinical parameters, and clinicians' experiences. Any of the parameters may not be best if a specific patient's situation is not considered. We do not know the exact mechanism of resistance to the previous treatment and do not have any good way to assess the mechanism of resistance. If cancer genomics is adopted in this situation, we can profile the tumor tissue that was resistant to the previous treatment. The profile can help clinicians decide on a second-line treatment option and improve the individual's outcome. The resistance mechanism could vary, depending on multidimensional factors, such as the patient, tumor biology, and previous treatment. Especially, this situation should be approached individually with the concept of true personalized medicine.
His disease began to grow again and he refused further cytotoxic chemotherapy. He was in hospice care and died 1 year after the initial diagnosis of relapse. After his death, his tumor was sequenced by whole-transcriptome analysis, and his tumor showed a ROS1 translocation. Now, a ROS1 inhibitor is available for this type of cancer.
The median overall survival of metastatic lung cancer patients is 1 year if there is no genetic alteration for which targeted agents are available [30, 34], as in this case. If the patient has an EGFR-sensitive mutation or ALK translocation, the median overall survival time reaches 2 years [35, 36]. A ROS1 targeting agent, another example of successful targeting of oncogene addiction, is now available after his death [27]. If the ROS1 translocation was known for his tumor and he was treated with a ROS1 inhibitor, he could have a chance to live an additional one year or more. Tumors have very heterogeneous profiles [37, 38], and resistant tumors have even more heterogeneous ones [39]. This is why tumors should ultimately be approached on an individual basis, rather than a population basis.