For early detection and diagnosis of cancer, the discovery of new biomarkers is very important, and the interest of researchers is growing rapidly. Also, genetic factors, including polymorphisms of genes involved in tumorigenesis, may partly explain the difference in individual susceptibility to cancer [38]. In the present study, we studied the impact of folate pathway gene polymorphisms on the risk of gastric cancer in a Korean population. Since folic acid was a critical cofactor in one-carbon metabolism involving in the biological methylation and nucleotide synthesis pathways, our study may find clues for the possible effect to dietary effects on gastric cancer.
In the report of previous studies, the frequency of genotypes for MTHFR was similar with our results-less than 5% for many SNPs [39, 40]. For MTHFR, one study found the association of rs1801133 with gastric cancer risk but no association of rs1801131 [34]. However, different results have been reported in other studies, showing no association for either SNP with gastric cancer [33]. We also found no association of either SNP with gastric cancer risk, which is concordant with the results of Kim's group [33]. For MTR, although a couple of reports have shown a significant association between the polymorphism of MTR and the risk of certain cancers [32], we could not find any association in our study population of gastric cancer.
In our study, a significant association of rs1801394 (A66G) in MTRR was found, especially with high OR among the obese gastric cancer group. MTRR regenerates a functional methionine synthase via reductive methylation so that methionine synthase can catalyze methionine synthesis, which is an essential amino acid required for protein synthesis and one-carbon metabolism. The A66G polymorphism is reported to be functional, so that the variant enzyme has a lower affinity for MTR [41]. A large number of studies have been conducted to evaluate the role of rs1801394 in different kinds of cancers; the results are still plausible. One meta-analysis reported that the A66G polymorphism should contribute to tumor susceptibility, showing significantly increased risk among Asians with the G allele, which is also in concordance with our result [42].
Our result is biologically plausible, since the polymorphisms or gene-environment interactions, rather than folate intake alone, would have an impact on the risk for digestive track cancer, because functional SNPs in folate-related genes were known to contribute to the alteration of folate metabolism [30]. The SNPs in folate pathway genes (such as MTHFR) were reported to influence to the decrease of the activity of the enzyme, leading to hyperhomocysteinemia, particularly in folate-deficient states [43]. Homocysteine was related to cancer formation, like tumor necrosis factor, obesity, and the folate pathway, and is known to be one of the main risk factors for distal gastric cancer, including H. pylori infection and dietary factors [44]. Although obesity (BMI > 25) was more prevalent in patients with cardia cancer compared to patients with gastric distal cancer in Koreans [45], a previous study reported that obesity is a major risk factor for several types of cancer, including gastric cancer [46]. Also, many epidemiological studies have shown that obesity is a risk factor for breast cancer, colon and kidney cancer, and malignant adenomas of the esophagus. Obesity subjects have an approximately 1.5-3.5-fold increased risk of developing these cancers compared with normal-weight subjects [47].
Here, we report the association of genetic variations in MTRR with the risk of gastric cancer for the first time. In further studies, we need to validate our finding in a larger population, considering detailed clinical information, and study the functional relevance of polymorphisms with cancer development more. Also, we need to consider other genes in the folate pathway and investigate gastric cancer susceptibility with epidemiological and environmental factors (e.g., nutrition intake, 5-FU drug interference, blood folate concentration, etc.).