Despite many technical challenges, the whole-genome sequence for a Homo species other than modern human is now there for the first time in just five years of the establishment of the project. It is no longer a question of the possibility of sequencing more genomes from archaic remains, and more such achievements will only strengthen our understanding of human evolution. All of our knowledge on human species-specific genetic elements thus far is based on comparison with non-human primates, which gives us information only on how humans are different from other primates, such as chimpanzee-not how modern humans excelled from archaic humans. Modern humans are considerably superior to their predecessors, and the availability of high-quality Neanderthal sequences can shed some light on the genetic basis of this phenomenon. An initial comparison between the genome sequences of these two species has given us some valuable insight, and more studies are being conducted to identify further variations between Neanderthal and humans. However, a lot remains to be done, which has been discussed in this article, albeit briefly. Even though the sequence comparison itself can not provide much confidence on the biological differences between the Homo species, the application of reverse genetics can be initiated from this point to speculate and validate the possible biological effects of such sequence differences. Once the molecular functions of such differences are identified in an in vitro analysis, they can be administered into mouse models to observe the phenotypic results of these changes. One such experiment has already been implemented by administering a human version of FOXP2 in the mouse genome to observe its effects [84]. Many behavioral and qualitative traits of humans can be understood at the molecular level using similar approaches. There has also been hype by the media over resurrecting Neanderthals by modifying the chimpanzee genome to be more Neanderthal-like [85]. But, it is still an impossible task to regenerate a species just from the genomic sequence, even if the ethical issues can be resolved [86]. However, Neanderthals do not have to be reincarnated to provide us with an enormous opportunity in the field of human genetics and evolution, as their genome is already offering a lot to better our understanding of ourselves.