Increasing coverage, sequencing more Neanderthals, and the Y chromosome
For a more comprehensive comparison of whole-genome sequences between Neanderthals and modern humans, the sequence coverage of Neanderthals has to be increased. The three approaches made so far to sequence the Neanderthal genome have resulted in the sequencing of only 65,000 bases [21], 1 million bases [19], and finally, the draft genome sequenced recently [27], consisting of only two-thirds of the whole genome with a mere 1.3× coverage. With such low coverage, it is hard to form meaningful contigs, and a number of important genetic entities will remain unnoticed. Even though it was beyond imagination to sequence a Pleistocene specimen a decade ago, the progress that has been made in the last 5 years is good enough to expect that more such specimens be sequenced in coming years. The more specimens from various geographic locations that are sequenced, the more likely it will be to construct a reference genome sequence for Neanderthals. As the human genome sequence varies considerably among different populations, it is expected that Neanderthals also have variation in their genomic sequences among different populations from different locations. Such variations can only be identified by sequencing a wide range of specimens, and these variations may again change insights into the Neanderthal-modern human relationship.
The sequencing of Neanderthals first started with its mitochondrial DNA in 1997 [25]. Comparisons between Neanderthal and modern human mitochondrial DNA have been made extensively, but these comparisons only reveal the maternally inherited difference between the species, as mitochondria DNA is transmitted maternally. The complete genomic sequence of Neanderthals published recently is also from a female specimen. Thus, the Y-chromosome of Neanderthals or paternal inheritance has yet to be examined. Comparisons of the Y chromosome sequence of Neanderthals with currently established Y-haplogroups for modern humans should provide some insights into the admixture hypothesis. With respect to the recent finding of admixture of Neanderthals with non-African populations, the Neanderthal Y chromosome should not match the Y haplogroups A or B, as these haplogroups are the oldest of the clades and almost restricted to Africans and their descendants [57, 58]. Since haplogroup E is found in Africa, the Middle East, Southern Europe, and Asia [59-61], the Neanderthal Y chromosome may match this haplogroup, but it should not match the haplogroups E1b1a*, E2b1, or B2a1a, as they are specifically treated as Bantu expansion markers, while Neanderthals interbred only with non-Africans [62, 63].