MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are groups of endogenous small, noncoding, single-stranded RNA molecules 20–24 nucleotides in length [1]. The miRNAs bind to the 3´ untranslated regions (UTRs) of its target mRNAs entirely or partly and they act as post-transcriptional inhibitors of gene expression [2, 3]. This event causes specific mRNA degradation or translational repression [4]. Each single miRNA could target numerous mRNAs, and a single mRNA can be targeted by several miRNAs, which allows to coordinate and control regulation of protein inhibition [5]. The miRNAs have played a role in a variety of biological processes such as cell proliferation, cell survival, DNA repair, and immune response [6]. Therefore, complex interactions involved in the regulation of gene expression have been well-established. At least up to 60% of protein-coding genes expressed in various species, and down-regulated more than 1,000 miRNAs [7].
The olive flounder Paralichthys olivaceus is one of the most important fish species that widely cultured in Korea, Japan, and China [8]. Recently, due to lots of consumption, its economic values have increased in the fish markets [9]. However, olive flounder is sensitive to infection of many bacterial pathogens [10] and they can trigger significant economic losses. Therefore, there has been an increase in studies that strive to understand the effects of bacterial infection in olive flounder via quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) [11]. Genetic variation and population structure among olive flounder populations are estimated using several molecular approaches. Those research results indicated proper yields and retaining genetic diversity [12]. Genetic variation is beneficial and important for the long-term survival of natural populations, as it ensures that a high level of fitness is maintained by giving populations the ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions [13]. Population genetic structure is influenced by the effects of gene flow, natural selection, genetic drift, and mutation [14].
According to the several functional studies, miRNA and their targets interaction in olive flounder indicated involvement in development, apoptosis, and metabolism [6, 15]. One of the representative studies is about the miR-17, and it is about metamorphic development of olive flounder that overexpressed miR-17 in FEC cells and suppressed Cdc42 expression due to miR-17 binds to 3´ UTR of Cdc42 gene. The declined metamorphic development means growth level of olive flounder also diminished [16]. Recently, studies have shown that 21 let-miR-7 precursors control metamorphosis stages from the larval to juvenile form in P. olivaceus. These let-7 miRNAs were shown in different positions of P. olivaceus genome and significantly expressed in adult tissues of olive flounder, but not expressed in embryonic development tissues, indicating that let-7 miRNAs could be associated with tissue development and metabolism process [17]. There is limited evidence between the miR-21-3p expression pattern and the quantitative expression levels of the target gene in various olive flounder tissues. Previous studies reported miR-21-3p function in different fields. For instance, some miRNAs have been found to function as oncogenic miRNAs, this can be observed in the study where miR-21-3p was found to be up-regulated in solid and hematological cancer tissues thus leading to the conclusion that miR-21-3p repress the expression of tumor suppressors like PTEN phosphatase and actin-binding protein tropomyosin I [18-20]. In addition, the set of miR-21 and its target mRNA, TGFBR2, were predicted as high binding affinity in seven types of solid tumor namely; lung, breast, colorectal, pancreatic, prostate, stomach, and bladder that indicated strong molecular interaction between miR-21 and TGFBR2 [21, 22]. The hsa-miR-21-3p was known as bipolar disorder (BP) dominant miRNA by verifying only increase of miR-21-3p in BP on fibroblast culture [23]. The miR-21-3p also upregulated expression in hearts of lipopolysaccharide-treated mice [24]. Due to down regulation of SH3 domain-containing protein 2 (SORBS2) is one of target genes of miR-21-3p and putative target of SORBS2 controls septic infection-associated cardiac dysfunction [24].
In the present study, the evolutionary conservation patterns of miR-21-3p in various species and miR-21-3p target genes were analyzed using bioinformatic tools. Also, expression patterns of miR-21-3p were analyzed in various tissues of olive flounder in relation to the target PPIL2 gene using qRT-PCR.