Enterobactin that is produced by E. coli is a high-affinity siderophore for iron [5]. In the enterobactin biosynthesis, chorismic acid is converted to DHBA by the products of entA, entB, and entC. An amide linkage of DHBA to L-serine (Ser) is then catalyzed by the proteins encoded by entD, entE, entF, and entB. The molecules of the DHBA-Ser that is formed undergo intermolecular cyclization, yielding enterobactin. A. baumannii also employs basF and basJ within the acinetobactin gene cluster, which are homologs of entC and entB, respectively, to produce mature acinetobactin [18]. However, entA has not been found in the acinetobactin gene cluster. Recently, it was found that a single functional copy of an entA ortholog is located in anupstream region of the modE-modA-modB-modC gene cluster that is required for the molybdenum transport system in A. baumannii ATCC 19606 (Fig. 2) [18]. In particular, a functional analysis based on gene cloning and biochemical tests showed that entA is absolutely required for the production of DHBA, which is used by A. baumannii as a precursor for acinetobactin biosynthesis. The study also demonstrated that acinetobactin intermediates and DHBA play important roles in the virulence of A. baumannii in ex vivo and in vivo infection models.
Even though entA is found outside of the acinetobactin cluster in A. baumannii strains, the genetic contents surrounding the entA gene are variable among different clinical isolates [18]. For example, the entA gene of A. baumannii ATCC 19606 is next to the coding regions of the mod gene cluster (Fig. 2). However, the entA gene of A. baumannii ATCC 17978 is situated within a large gene cluster that encodes an uncharacterized siderophore-mediated system (Fig. 2). Especially, this cluster, in which mobile DNA elements exist, is flanked by inverted repeats, a feature that can explain its transfer by lateral processes. Therefore, these results represent that genetic components that are required for iron acquisition via the acinetobactin-mediated system give rise to horizontal gene transfer with complex chromosomal rearrangement processes. Consequently, the newly added siderophore gene cluster with the entA gene via horizontal gene transfer may cause these two strains, ATCC 19606 and ATCC 17978, to acquire iron via different siderophore-mediated systems from different sources. The possibility was proven by a genomic analysis of fully sequenced and annotated A. baumannii isolates [15, 19]. Four siderophore gene clusters are newly predicted to be involved in siderophore production and the uptake of iron-siderophore complexes (Table 1). Cluster 1 is indicated in the genomes of all strains analyzed, with the exception of A. baumannii 8399. Cluster 2 and cluster 4 are found only in A. baumannii ATCC 17978 and isolate 8399, respectively. Cluster 5 is present in all genomes analyzed except for that of A. baumannii ATCC 17978. The possibility is also supported by the result that the iron uptake phenotype of the A. baumannii ATCC 17978 basD mutant was not different from that of the parental 17978 strain when compared under iron-limited conditions.