Primary liver cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world, accounting for an estimated 600,000 deaths annually [1]. In Korea, liver cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths (10,946 death in 2010) [2]. In the United States, primary liver cancer has gained major interest, because the incidence of liver cancer has increased over the past 25 years, and the incidence and mortality rate of liver cancer are expected to double over the next 10 to 20 years [3-5]. Therefore, prevention and treatment of liver cancer are of great concern.
While primary liver cancer is one of the few cancers with well-defined major risk factors, such as hepatitis virus infection, alcohol consumption, and obesity, the molecular pathogenesis of liver cancer is not well understood [6-8]. Patients with liver cancer have a highly variable clinical course [7, 9], indicating that liver cancer comprises several biologically distinct subgroups. Therefore, it will be necessary to understand liver cancer at a genomic and molecular level for improved stratification of patients, identification of novel druggable targets, and development of personalized treatment, based on the biological characteristics of tumors in each patient.
Due to the complex nature of cancers that are initiated by activation of many different oncogenes or inactivation of different tumor suppressor genes and progress by additional genetic or epigenetic alterations, conventional gene-by-gene approaches are likely to deliver only a limited understanding of the biological and pathological characteristics of cancer cells. However, the recent development of technologies for gene expression profiling, genome-wide copy number analysis, and whole-genome sequencing has enabled the comprehensive characterization of entire cancer genomes. This information promises to improve our understanding of the genetic and epigenetic alterations driving the development of liver cancer, as well as ultimately provide guidance on personalized treatment of patients. Although these large-scale genomic data promise improvement in the treatment of liver cancer, challenges remain for the management and integration of these data for a better understanding of how these alterations give rise to the development of liver cancer and, most importantly, the translation of these findings into personalized patient treatment.