Other approaches
In the past, most NER systems were rule-based or leveraged graph-based models such as CRFs, while nowadays the task is usually approached with deep learning techniques. In the case of CER systems, we can highlight some relevant works.
ChemicalTagger [7] parsed the text with a formal grammar and domain-specific regular expressions (regex) and used the parse tree in combination with the Part-of-Speech (POS) tags obtained with an English tagger in order to extract chemical entities. They reported achieving machine-annotator agreements of 88.9% for phrase recognition and 91.9% for phrase-type identification. The test corpus was assembled by compiling 50 paragraphs from the experimental sections of polymer synthesis related papers.
CheNER [8], a tool for the identification of chemical entities and their classes in the biomedical literature, is based on a combination of CRFs, regex and dictionary matching. An F-Score of about 73% was reported, with minor differences depending on the particular experiment. For evaluation, two corpora containing 3,500 documents with approximately 29,500 annotated chemical entities divided into several classes were used.
On the other hand, MetaMap [8], a tool for recognizing Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) concepts in the text, mapped entities to UMLS concepts by the means of rules and a parser.
In CHEMDNER [6], a drug and chemical names extraction competition, the top scoring teams obtained F-scores of 87.39% and 88.2% depending on the particular task, employing CRFs and domain-specific rules. These scores were obtained in the CHEMDNER corpus, a dataset with chemical compounds manually annotated by domain experts.
With regard to drug recognition, a vast survey on approaches and resources was presented in Liu et al.’s study [9], including classical machine learning techniques and hybrid approaches. The authors suggested using deep learning techniques for drug recognition as future work.
A system for drug name recognition and classification in biomedical texts was introduced in Segura-Bedmar et al.’s study [10]. By combining information obtained by the UMLS MetaMap Transfer (MMTx) program and nomenclature rules recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) INNs Program, a broader coverage than previous approaches based on standalone MMTx was achieved.
For an extensive review of text mining techniques for drugs and chemical compounds, readers can refer to Vazquez et al.’s study [11].
Nevertheless, the aforementioned works used techniques that have some important limitations [1]. Dictionary-based methods have problems dealing with name variability since chemical naming exhibits high variation. Rule construction, apart from requiring domain knowledge and an extensive manual workload, has proven to be difficult to scale to new rules and to transfer to slightly different domains. On the other hand, statistical models such as CRFs and classic machine learning algorithms are not powerful enough for detecting some patterns and require a certain amount of feature engineering. All these previous approaches focused on data in English, despite the fact that there is a considerable amount of textual data and repositories (e.g., MEDES, Scielo, Ibecs, or Cuiden), as well as a large medical end users community interested in tools for processing data in Spanish. Regarding other languages, this work [12] presented a system based on CRFs that was capable of recognizing entities in French biomedical documents.