Presently, there are 3,279 virus reference genomes registered in NCBI. More than 1.8 million sequences are included in GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) [1]. The number of whole-genome sequences in GenBank is rapidly increasing, as shown in Fig. 1. Currently, only about 1,800 genome sequences have been assigned to species in International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV); the remaining 1,400 sequences have not been classified as species. Although ICTV is responsible for viral classification, it does not have the capacity to immediately formulate the naming conventions and taxonomy for the large number of viral sequences that is submitted to the organization.
However, with the advent of next-generation sequencing and the enhancement of NCBI GenBank data, the classical ICTV method of viral classification based on phenotypic parameters has been converting to a classification based on genotypic classification due to improvements in the speed and accuracy associated with virus taxonomy. Recently, a metagenomic method based on genotype was proposed as an approach to aid virus taxonomy [2]. However, this creates a requirement for an appropriate data handling and analysis pipeline to cope with such needs.
Since the development of web servers in 1993, bioinformatics data have been provided through browser-based systems. Many analysis tools, such as MSA, BLAST, and Genome Browser, have been developed for end users. In the case of ICTV taxonomy and naming, the initial ICTVdB was developed with flat data (DELTA: DEscription Language for TAxonomy), which was not connected to other databases. ICTVdB did not contain any sequence information but was used for phylogenetic analysis [3]. Presently, the 10th ICTV virus taxonomy has been published and is available on the ICTV website (http://ictv.global/report/). However, there is no easy approach to NCBI GenBank data based on ICTV taxonomy, strain, or isolation information for selected viral species, because ICTV taxonomy has only been providing up to the species level. Also, web-based ICTV taxonomy does not provide direct PubMed access, which facilitates academic searches. As a result, our virus taxonomy website reinforces this problem and extends the related tables in the ICTV database.