The high and sustained growth rate in scholarly publications requires ever more efficient ways to identify the most relevant documents for the own research work and increasingly, the scientific text is exploited to guide this search. This requires Named Entity Recognition and Text-Mining approaches, but also effective ways to expose identified data as structured metadata and to interlink to data and metadata with external sources such as ontologies and fact repositories, which is still a challenging research domain. The Journal Article Tag Suite (JATS) serves as the preferred (semi)structured approach for publishers to provide machine-readable access to scholarly articles [1]. Although XML is a well-established and shared format, it falls behind in the efficient use of semantics, where Resource Data Framework (RDF)/XML or JSON-LD deliver better results. However, deploying a RDF infrastructure approach can only be achieved with significant overheads in comparison to offering RESTful services for the reason that data (and metadata) is more readily available through RESTful services in contrast to data provision through XML repositories. Schema.org forms a lightweight alternative, i.e., allows semantic annotation at low development overheads, in comparison to complete semantic environments based on ontologies and RDF approaches.
Schema.org is a collaborative initiative offering a simple yet effective way to add structured metadata to web pages via markup: making pages more findable and improving search results as search engines can identify better the clues what a page is about. Schema.org also eases the ways to interlink related resources; for instance, a movie can be linked to its actors, directors or similar movies. Such interlinking of web resources can boost interoperability, allowing search engines to move from mainly presenting search only to providing comprehensive summaries. Scholarly literature repositories such as Zenodo and EuropePMC have recognized the potential of schema.org and currently support markup on their pages. However, they mostly limit to metadata, i.e., authors, title, abstract and journal, leaving aside any entity of interest from the life science domain that could be recognized from the text. Despite its popularity, the high diversity of properties in schema.org makes it still difficult for not well prepared data scientists to adopt such markup. Bioschemas, a community and collaborative project, focuses on integrating Life Science types to schema.org and, at the same time, makes its adoption easier via profiles tailored to the Life Science domain [2]. A profile comprises a fixed combination (a “set”) of guidelines regarding minimum, recommended and optional properties, well-known ontology terms to be used together with the properties and examples, so that users can use them as a template to markup their own resources.
Biotea proposes a conceptual model to represent scholarly publications as Linked Data [3,4], covering not only the metadata but also the article structure, content and semantic annotations, where a semantic annotation corresponds to a named entity recognized from the text. Biotea currently supports annotations obtained from the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) annotator service [5]; however, additional annotators could be added. In order to facilitate the adoption of schemas.org markup for scholarly articles as well as to add support to semantic annotations, Biotea has joined the Bioschemas effort by adding five scholarly publication related profiles. Here we report on the Biotea draft profiles proposed to Bioschemas and on two web components capable to render schema.org markup for scholarly articles metadata together with annotations, using the PubMed Central Open Access subset (PMC-OA) as main input. As a result, we anticipate a knowledge graph derived from the scientific literature and based on Bioschema. This type of graph eases the way towards co-citation networks, author-expertise networks, and ontology-based associations among others.