By providing a rich functional annotation of the genome, the numerous epigenomic datasets have significantly improved our ability to probe the mechanisms of gene regulation as well as shed light on disease processes mediated by perturbation of normal regulatory processes. A collection of 30 scientific reports published with the initial release of the ENCODE data provides a detailed report of the initial integrative analysis of the epigenomics data [47, 63, 64, 65, 66].
At a basic level, the data have revealed epigenomic signatures of a variety of functional elements, thus significantly enriching their annotation. For instance, many non-coding RNAs have been successfully annotated as a result of deciphering an epigenomic code specific to their promoters and gene bodies [67, 68]. High-throughput profiling of the histone modification HeK4me1 has revealed that it is a characteristic mark of enhancer elements; this, and other correlative marks have enabled the discovery of tens of thousands of cell-specific enhancers [69, 70] in the human genome, drastically improving our ability to probe the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation. In fact, chromatin signatures specific to promoters, enhancers, and repressed regions, etc., have all been modeled by computational methods like ChromHMM [42]. Furthermore, by isolating footprints of protected DNA present inside blocks of hypersensitive or nucleosome-depleted DNA, a comprehensive list of potential cis-regulatory binding sites/sequences has been identified, despite the lack of specific antibodies or the knowledge of cell-specific regulators [2].
Availability of epigenomic data has revived predictive modeling of condition-specific gene expression. For example, Dong et al. [71] generated a 2-step quantitative model that includes genome localization data for 11 histone modifications and 1 histone variant in 7 human cell lines and gene expression data quantified using RNA-seq and cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) in the nuclear and cytosolic compartments of the cell. The Pearson's correlation coefficient between their predicted and measured expression levels in about 78 experiments ranged between 0.6 and 0.9 (median r = 0.83). Natarajan et al. [72] trained a classifier that associates cell-specific TF sequence motif matches in DHS regions with different expression patterns in 19 diverse cell types, thus predicting cell-type specific expression directly from regulatory elements in open chromatin.
Prior to the availability of NGS, details of the spatial structure of chromatin and its correlates, as well as its functional impacts were largely uncharted. Characterization of the spatial proximity of distal genomic elements with 3C-derivative assays has revealed a high rate of widespread promiscuous interactions among enhancers and promoters. For instance, more than 40% of promoters interact with multiple distal sites, and this is likely true for enhancers as well [73]. The spatial chromatin interaction data have also helped challenge some previously held beliefs that were nevertheless unsupported. For instance, historically, the DNA-binding protein CTCF was known to function, among other things, as an insulator that inhibited the spatial interaction between an enhancer and its target promoter when flanking a CTCF-bound locus. However, recent 5C data showed that almost 60% of all enhancer-promoter interactions happen, despite an intervening CTCF-bound locus [74]. In fact, there is increasing evidence that CTCF, along with cohesin is involved in coordinating long-range interactions between regulatory elements, and that these events are reflective of cell-type specific transcriptional programs [75].
With the availability of putative genome-wide enhancers along with their cell type-specific activity profile across numerous cell types, it is now possible to investigate an alternate layer of transcriptional regulation represented by a network of distal enhancers that exhibit correlated activities across cell types [76, 77] and jointly underlie correlated expression of functionally linked genes. Such analysis brings forth an alternative view of transcriptional regulation, where instead of a single gene regulated by one or more regulatory elements, one ought to consider the collective of enhancers and genes, co-localized in nuclear space to achieve coexpression of functionally linked genes [78, 79].
Epigenomic profiling along the developmental time course from ESCs to differentiated cells has shed light on transcriptional regulatory mechanisms during early development. For instance, comparison of the "histone code" between the two developmental timeframes indicates that regions marked by repressive histone marks are generally larger in differentiated cells and that these regions span developmental genes. It was also noted that the same regions are more accessible in ESCs [80, 81], thus suggesting an epigenome-mediated regulation of developmental gene transcription. Precisely how this is accomplished is yet to be clarified.
The epigenomic data and the discovery of significant patterns of epigenomic marks associated with specific functional regions have also helped clarify genotype-phenotype association data. Numerous GWAS have revealed several polymorphic loci associated with various diseases [82]. However, a mechanistic interpretation of these signals has been hampered by the fact that most of the disease-associated genetic variants reside in non-coding regions with no obvious functional interpretation. By combining epigenomic maps and genetic variants, it was found that these disease-associated variants are enriched within cell type-specific accessible (DHS regions) and active regulatory regions [2]. Also, an epigenomic model of cardiac enhancers was shown to provide a better causal interpretation of GWAS signals associated with heart-related traits [83].