Histone modifications and cancer
Nucleosomes are the basic units of chromatin that are composed of DNA wrapped around 8 histone core proteins [9]. One of best understood epigenetic mechanisms is histone modification. The histone N-terminal tails protrude from nucleosome cores and thus are subject to numerous modifications, such as acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, ADP-ribosylation, and citrullination, creating a massively complex bar code. It is thought that activating or repressive complexes are recruited to DNA and reshape chromatin into relaxed or a tightly packed structure, based on the histone code-instructions through a combination of histone modifications [10]. Like a writer, histone-modifying enzymes write the histone code via histone modifications and mark specific sites of the genome with histone modifications-for example, active promoter regions that are marked with augmented trimethylation in H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me3) inactive promoters that are marked with augmented trimethylated H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) or trimethylated H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me3), and enhancers that are marked with monomethylated H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me1) and/or acetylated H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27ac) [11-13]. These histone modification patterns are regulated by a variety of enzymes, including histone acetyltransferases and deacetylases, which introduce and remove acetyl groups, respectively. Similarly, histone methyltransferases (HMTs) and demethylases introduce and remove methyl groups. The combination of histone modifications largely affects gene expression by the recruitment of transcriptional regulatory proteins, which bind to specific modified histone markings. Thus, a combination of histone modifications acts as a histone code-high-level information residing above the genetic code, which is genetic information stored in the form of DNA.
Aberrant patterns of histone modification marks are often found in cancer. Advances in high-throughput sequencing have allowed for genome-wide mapping of chromatin changes that occur during tumor initiation and progression [8]. A recent report suggested that cancer cells often experience losses of histone acetylation and methylation, occurring predominantly at the acetylated Lys16 and trimethylated Lys20 residues in histone H4. These losses are also associated with the hypomethylation of repetitive DNA sequences, which is a well-known characteristic of cancer cells [14].