For both the real and simulated datasets, the results show that FusionScan provides reliable predictions in fusion discovery under different sequencing coverage and read length. Even though the general trends were similar between the two datasets, the precision was much worse for the experimental datasets. This indicates that there exist many factors influencing the prediction accuracy in reality (e.g., coverage imbalance, sequencing errors, and sequence polymorphisms). Thus, the result from simulation data should be taken cautiously. Interestingly, SOAPfuse achieved better recall rate for the experimental datasets.
FusionScan was the only program with the precision rate over 50%. The enhanced performance of FusionScan may be ascribed to several points as follows.
(1) Accurate read alignment is absolutely critical. We have selected SSAHA2 as the most sensitive mapping program through a test with known fusion transcripts. This process minimizes the loss of true positives from the start. In a similar effort, SOAPfusion used a special aligner that masked the intronic regions from the transcripts. It should be noted that other alignment tools in Table 1 may do better with extensive adjustment of optional parameters. We provide the full set of known fusion cases for testing such possibility.
(2) Reads with alternative mapping positions should be analyzed cautiously. Many false-positives from other programs had their seed reads mapped to other positions concordantly with similar mapping quality. FusionScan removed those ambiguously mapped reads using extensive filters afterwards. Critical two steps were removing repeats, paralogs, and pseudo-genes and recalibration with BLAT alignment as shown in Fig. 1.
Predicting fusion genes from RNA-Seq data is a procedure full of optimization steps. For example, we have noticed that four true positive cases in MCF-7 cell line were filtered out in FusionScan at the final step since they had only one seed read. Relieving the minimum number of seed reads as 1 or using support reads as the basis of rescuing those cases would introduce too many false-positives.
We used the preliminary version of FusionScan and TopHat-Fusion to build the ChimerDB 3.0 update [36]. Fusion gene candidates were obtained by analyzing RNA-Seq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Of note, STAR-Fusion was recently released in bioRxiv and GitHub. It achieved comparable performance to FusionScan in terms of precision and recall rate. JAFFA is another latest pipeline for fusion detection that utilizes read assembly into transcripts before fusion detection [37]. This assembly-based method certainly achieved a good performance in favorable conditions with large number of high quality reads. But its performance decreased rapidly in bad conditions where misassembles led to many false-positives and negatives. A latest benchmark test was carried out to evaluate the performance of 12 popular fusion detection tools and provided some guidelines even though their test datasets are rather limited [38].
In conclusion, FusionScan made a reasonable compromise between precision and recall rates, achieving 60% and 79%, respectively, in tests using experimental datasets. With implementation of several curative tools facilitating validation of fusion transcripts, we believe that FusionScan would be a reliable tool for detecting fusion transcripts, meeting the conservative conditions required for clinical and experimental studies.