Since the discovery of transposable elements in maize in 1940s by McClintock [19, 20, 21, 22], TEs have been found to be ubiquitously present in eukaryotes [23]. TEs are capable of moving their locations within the genome so that they can generate genomic plasticity by inducing various chromosomal mutations and allelic diversity [24, 25, 26]. TEs are conventionally classified into two classes based on the transposition mode: class 1 TEs and class 2 TEs [27]. Class 1 TEs are the retrotransposons that retrotranspose via an mRNA intermediate in a "copy-and-paste" process that can lead to extremely high copy numbers in the genome. Class 2 TEs comprise transposons that transpose directly via DNA by a "cut-and-paste" process that allows them to attain moderate copies in the genome. With the plethora of information of whole-genome sequences in a growing number of species [3, 28], more and more families of TEs are being mined, which necessitates the adoption of a unified classification system for TEs. This systematic classification groups the TEs into 2 major classes, 9 orders, and 29 superfamilies by the mode of chromosomal integration, gene structure, and sequence similarity [23].
Class 1 TEs can be subdivided into several subclasses but generally into two subclasses: LTR retrotransposons and non-LTR retrotransposons. Although both LTR and non-LTR retrotransposons are in plant genomes, LTR retrotransposons are more prevalent than non-LTR retrotransposons in plant species. LTRs range from a few hundred base pairs to several kb (kilobases), and LTRs start with nucleotides of 5'-TG-3' and end with 5'-CA-3'. Because the LTR retrotransposons integrate into 4- to 6-bp staggered cut sites, they produce 4- to 6-bp target site duplication (TSD) upon integration. The LTR retrotransposons encode two open reading frames, GAG and POL [29, 30, 31]. GAG encodes a protein for replication, and POL encodes protease (PR), integrase (INT), reverse transcriptase (RT), and RNase H (RH). The LTR retrotransposons are divided into two superfamilies, Ty1-copia (Pseudovirideae) and Ty3-gypsy (Metavirideae), based on the order of genes they encode [23]. The overall sequences are similar, but the gene order is PR-INT-RT-RH in Ty1-copia and PR-RT-INT-RH in Ty3-gypsy retrotransposons, respectively. Phylogenetic analyses of the RT domain revealed a monophyletic origin of the Ty1-copia and Ty3-gypsy subfamilies [32, 33]. Moreover, the high sequence similarity and gene structure between Ty3-gypsy elements and retroviruses indicate that retroviruses evolved from Ty3-gypsy elements by acquisition of the env gene [31, 34].
Although non-LTR retrotransposons are less prevalent than LTR retrotransposons in plant taxa, four main orders of class 1 non-LTR retrotransposons, Dictyostelium intermediate repeat sequence, Penelope-like element), long interspersed nuclear elements and short interspersed nuclear element), are found in plants [23, 31]. DIRSs carry unusual split direct repeats or an inverted repeat at both ends and do not produce TSD upon integration. Termini of PLE elements are LTR-like, but their orientation can be either a direct or an inverted orientation. They have an RT and endonuclease domain, and the RT domain of PLE is more similar to telomerase than the RT of LTR retrotransposons. Both long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) and short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) lack LTRs at their termini. While LINEs can reach several kb, SINEs are short (80-500 bp). LINEs are predominant elements in animal genomes, whereas they are not prevalent in plant genomes except the Del-2 element, which is highly abundant in the genomes of species in the genus Lilium. The Del-2 elements will be discussed in more detail in the following session. Of the five major superfamilies (R2, L1, RTE, I, and Jokey) in the LINE order, only L1 and I are present in plant genomes [23, 31]. SINEs are also highly abundant in animal genomes, especially in mammalian genomes; they are relatively less dominant in plant genomes. The best known SINE is the Alu element, which is present in up to 500,000 copies in the human genome [35]. The origin of SINEs is obscure and is presumed to have originated from various polymerase III transcripts. Their AT-rich 3'-region carries 35-bp tandem repeats or contains a poly(T) tail, the pol III termination signal [35].
Class II DNA transposons can be subdivided into subclass 1 of terminal inverted repeat (TIR) transposons and subclass 2 of non-TIR transposons [23, 31]. The subclass 1 TIR DNA transposons are flanked by various lengths of TIRs and produce various lengths of small TSDs upon integration. The TIR transposons encode a transposase, which excises the element from the genome and integrates into a new site in the genome, because it has both endonuclease and ligase activity [36, 37, 38]. The TIRs form a secondary structure where transposases bind. Most of the known transposases carry a DDE catalytic motif, which comes in close proximity to each other and forms a catalytic center to enable the enzyme to excise the transposon DNA from the original site and reinsert it into the target site [39]. The subclass 1 TIR DNA transposons are classified into 10 superfamilies based on the sequence similarities. Of the 10 superfamilies, plant genomes harbor 6 superfamilies: Tc-Mariner, hAT, Mutator, P, PIF-Harbinger, and CACTA.
In the subclass 2 non-TIR DNA transposons, two non-TIR DNA transposon superfamilies, Helitrons and Maverick, are present. Helitrons are widespread, diverse, and abundant in some plants, but their identification is difficult due to their lack of a terminal repeat structure [40]. The Helitrons replicate via a rolling-circle mechanism and do not produce TSDs upon integration. Helitrons can attain very high copy numbers and create genomic diversity. Indeed, they are present in high copies, and captured gene fragments of pseudogenes contribute to maize genome diversity [41, 42, 43].
Depending on the movability both class 1 and class 2 TEs can be further classified into autonomous and non-autonomous elements. While the autonomous elements equip all the machinery in mobilizing themselves, the non-autonomous elements lack one or all of the components of this machinery [44]. The non-autonomous elements are decayed autonomous elements by deletion or other mutations, but they are highly abundant in plant genomes [23]. Transposition of class 1 elements is a multi-step process. That is, they must be transcribed and translated to produce proteins to reverse-transcribe the mRNA and package it into virus-like particles. The non-autonomous class 1 retrotransposons lack self-encoded proteins, so that the multi-step is blocked. However, they can be mobilized if the missing proteins are provided in trans [45]. The BARE1 and BARE2 elements illustrate an example of the autonomy and non-autonomy of the class 1 retrotransposons. BARE1 (Barley RetroElement1) is a copia-like retrotransposon and highly abundant in the barley genome [46]. It is an autonomous element, and the protein machinery encoded is produced. The BARE2 is a non-autonomous element, having most of its protein-coding domains intact, except for the defective Gag gene. The defect of BARE2 was complemented by the BARE1 machinery to retrotranspose in the barley genome [47]. In class 2 DNA transposons, the non-autonomous elements cannot express transposase to catalyze their own transposition. Because they were derived from autonomous elements, they form a binary system in terms of mobilization, which was recognized in the Ac/Ds system by the early pioneering observation in maize by McClintock [22]. miniature inverted repeat transposable elements) are worthwhile mentioning here among the non-autonomous class 1 transposons [48, 49, 50]. Because MITEs are small and carry only the minimal feature of TIR, they have been elusive in the identification of autonomous elements to mobilize them to attain very high copies in plant genomes. By an extensive bioinformatics search, it was revealed that Stowaway MITEs were derived from the Tc1/mariner superfamily, and Tourist MITEs were derived from the PIF/Harbinger superfamily [51]. Thus, it was deduced that MITEs can burst by autonomous elements in these superfamilies.