Basically, it was an interesting finding that genes, named the G64 module in our previous study (i.e., a highly coregulated gene group), can classify not only single cells derived from a single tumor but also tumors that have originated from several different cancers. Various biomarkers have been identified and developed for molecular diagnostics in cancers. In fact, numerous genes included in the list of the G64 module have already been identified as cancer diagnostic or prognostic markers by several independent researchers [141516]. For instance, CDCA5 and NCAPH have been characterized to be highly expressed in lung cancers [1718]. Our previous study showed that cell cycle genes were a main functional GO category in the G64 module. Consistently, dysregulation of the cell cycle has long been proven to be a critical process causing cancers [19202122]. However, to our knowledge, it was the first finding ever that G64 genes were co-regulated in various cancers, and patient prognosis can be differentiated by these genes. Here, we clearly showed that the G64 module can be a good biomarker, predicting cancer prognosis at least for six different cancers—i.e., seven different cancers if LADC is included.
It is unclear what common molecular characteristics the seven cancers (i.e., 6 cancers in the present study and LADC) share together other than co-regulated G64 expression. The seven cancers must be initiated and progress by different genetic or environmental causes and pathways, and there is no proper explanation for the common subpopulation differentiation carried through G64 expression. It is also hard to explain at this moment why the 64 genes are co-regulated on an inter-tumoral level and intra-tumoral level and why up-regulating patients tend to have a poor prognosis. One possibility we can think of is that expression of these genes may be associated with drug metabolism, contributing to drug sensitivity or drug resistance. It will be interesting to study further how expression of G64 is changed during the recurrence of cancers. Taken together, G64 genes would be a good candidate of developing prognostic markers for multiple cancers.