Swine flu, also known as influenza A (H1N1) is an infectious disease caused by RNA viruses of the family Orthomyxoviridae [1]. The H1N1 influenza virus arises due to the genetic recombination of genes from pig, human, and bird's H1N1 virus. It is unevenly spherical and is enveloped by a lipid membrane containing two glycoproteins namely hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) [1], which are responsible for viral infection [2]. HA helps in attachment of the viral strain on the host cell surface and is needed for infection, while NA is responsible initiation of viral infection by cleaving of sialic acid from glycans of the infected cell [34]. As these two glycoproteins are very essential for viral infection, these can be considered as excellent drug targets for the control of viral influenza, including H1N1. Although oseltamivir and zanamivir, two NA inhibitors approved for treatment and prevention of influenza [56], more effective natural medications are required for preventing the wide spread of swine flu.
There are many plant products traditionally used for treatment of common cold that provide relief from symptoms, including sore throat, sneezing, nasal congestion and blocked nose [7]. Most of them are plant extracts and the exact mechanism of action are yet to be fully understood. The interaction profile of the active compounds of those plant extracts with viral proteins are need to be explored further, so as to design novel drugs of natural origin which could be possibly used effectively in prevention or treatment of H1N1 influenza without any adverse effects.
There are many plant products traditionally used for treatment of influenza infection among them few natural compounds such as allicin, ajoene, andrographolide, baicalin, carvacrol, catechin, coumarin, curcumin, menthol, eugenol, theaflavin, ursolic acid, and tinosporon have been reported to act against human influenza. The active constituents of the essential oil from the fruit of Trachyspermum ammi are thymol and carvacrol [8]. The essential oil has strong antiseptic, antispasmodic, aromatic, bitter, diaphoretic, digestive, diuretic, expectorant, and tonic [9]. Also, it is used for the treatment of cold, cough, influenza, and asthma [10]. The Ocimum sanctum have great Ayurvedic treatment option for swine flu. The main chemical constituents of O. sanctum are oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, rosmarinic acid, eugenol, carvacrol, linalool, and β-caryophyllene [11]. The antimicrobial properties of O. sanctum make it useful for the prevention of novel H1N1 flu. Basil is safe, with no side effects and is great to prevent swine flu from spreading like wildfire [12]. Zingiber officinalis (ginger) has been reported as the natural remedies for swine flu prevention. The active compounds present in ginger are allicin, alliin, and ajoene etc and the compound allicin has been reported to have anti-influenza cytokine [13]. Allium sativum (garlic) has natural antiviral, antibacterial, and immune-boosting properties and has been used for hundreds of years to treat fungal, parasitic, and viral infections, and has anti-inflammatory properties and it is reported to kill influenza virus in vitro condition [14]. The active compound found in fresh garlic is ajoene. Curcumin, the active constituents of Curcuma longa (turmeric), is reported to have strong antioxidant with antiinflammatory, anti-viral properties [15]. Tinospora cordifolia having active compound tinosporon, tinosporic acid, and syringen prevent swine flu. The plant has immense potential for use against novel H1N1 flu since it is a potent immunostimulant [16]. The principal components of the oil of Mentha piperita are menthol (29%), menthone (20% to 30%), and menthyl acetate (3% to 10%). Menthol has antimicrobial and antiviral activity and also observed to have virucidal against influenza, herpes, and other viruses in vitro [17]. Green tea is particularly rich in polyphenolic compounds like theaflavin and catechins. Catechin and theaflavin derivatives have shown pronounced antiviral activity. Green tea has the ability to enhance humoral and cell-mediated immunity and therefore, useful for preventing influenza by inhibiting flu replication using potentially directs virucidal effect [718].
In the current study, we performed docking analysis to explore the atomic interaction and molecular mechanism between 13 plants originated active compounds such as allicin, ajoene, andrographolide, baicalin, carvacrol, catechin, coumarin, curcumin, menthol, eugenol, theaflavin, tinosporon, and ursolic acid against NA protein of H1N1. This study comprises of protein structure modeling of NA using Phyre2 server followed by structural refinement and energy minimization by Yet Another Scientific Artificial Reality Application (YASARA) energy minimization server. Auto-Dock4.2 tool was used to analyze the molecular interaction between NA with natural ligands.