Legionella pneumophila is a gram-negative intracellular facultative pathogen that is mainly responsible behind hospital and community-acquired legionellosis and about 90% cases of legionellosis are caused by this species [1]. Legionellosis patients predominantly have pneumonia, chills, fever even their cough likely to be dry or phlegm nature. L. pneumophila isolation by comparing clinical and environmental L. pneumophila isolates precludes different sources whether it is contagious or not through a number of typing methods. Such methods of typing make it's easier like pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), is usually considered to be extremely biased [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. PFGE can recognize unique strains of L. pneumophila with a precise profile that is considered sporadic. The origin of L. pneumophila sg 1 clone was identified at 1997. In Paris, legionellosis was caused by a single L. pneumophila sero group 1 strain [7]. An ample of enzymes is required in bacterial metabolism. Drugs resistance against L. pneumophila considered to the search for most novel drugs of designing. At present, computational analysis was taken place in order to discover novel drug targets that are non-homologous to human. All enzymes involved in metabolic pathway of those certain bacteria are precursor to design such kind of drugs. Phosphoglucosaminemutase and phosphomannomutase, these two typically have the potential target sites. Phosphomannomutase is processed with glycosylation, adding the groups of sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) to proteins. The enzyme phosphoglucosamine mutase catalyzes the chemical reaction alpha-D-glucosamine 1-phosphate to D-glucosamine 6-phosphate, which converts alpha-D-glucosamine 1-phosphate to D-glucosamine 6-phosphate. This enzyme is phenomenally the same as phosphomannomutase, which transfers a phosphate group within a molecule. The systematic name of phosphoglucosamine mutase is alpha-D-glucosamine 1,6-phosphomutase. It participates in metabolism of amino sugars. Phosphoglucosamine mutase (GlmM) catalyzes the formation of glucosamine-1-phosphate from glucosamine-6-phosphate, an essential step in the pathway for UDPN-acetylglucosamine biosynthesis in bacteria. This enzyme must be phosphorylated to be active and acts according to a ping-pong mechanism involving glucosamine-1,6-diphosphate as an intermediate [8]. The phosphoglucosamine mutase auto-phosphorylates in vitro in the presence of ATP. The same is pragmatic with phosphoglucosamine mutases from other bacterial species, yeast N-acetylglucosamine-phosphate mutase, and rabbit muscle phosphoglucomutase. Labeling of GlmM enzyme with ATP requires divalent cation. The label can be lost if it is incubated more vigorously with of its substrates. At glycosylation, the phosphomannomutase enzyme converts mannose-6-phosphate to mannose-1-phosphate [9]. Mannose-1-phosphate is converted into GDP-mannose which transfers mannose to the growing oligosaccharides chain. Congenital disorder type Iais is initiated by mutations in the PMM2 gene. Mutations alter the formation of phosphomannomutase enzyme that lead to the reduced enzyme activity and shortage of GDP mannose within cells. As there have no enough activated mannose, incorrect oligosaccharides are produced. Abnormal glycosylated proteins in organs and tissues regulate the signs and symptoms in CDG-Ia [10]. In addition, it participates in the metabolism of both fructose and mannose.
So, homology modeling will predict the desired function and possible disease treatment if needed because of its importance on cell metabolism systems. The present study is aimed to predict the three-dimensional (3D) structure of phosphoglucosamine mutase by means of homology modeling. Consequently, to depict its structural features and to comprehend the molecular function, the structural model for the desired protein was constructed.