Next generation sequencing (NGS), a high-throughput DNA sequencing technology, is widely used for molecular biological studies. In NGS, the RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq), which is a short-read massively parallel sequencing, is a major quantitative transcriptome tool for many types of transcriptome studies, such as mRNA and miRNA. To utilize the RNA-Seq data, various quantification and analysis methods have been developed to solve specific research goals, including identifying differentially expressed genes and detection of novel transcripts. With the accumulation of RNA-Seq data in the public databases, there is a demand for integrative analysis, and its development is an ongoing challenge [1]. However, the available RNA-Seq data are stored in different formats. In particular, in the public databases such as GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), ArrayEXpress (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the quantitative measurements of the processed RNA-Seq data sets are available in various formats, which are not unified. The following are different formats of measurements provided by the public databases. Read count routinely refers to the number of reads that align to a particular region. Counts per million mapped reads are counts scaled by the number of sequenced fragments multiplied by one million. Transcripts per million (TPM) is a measurement of the proportion of transcripts in a pool of RNA. Reads per kilobase of exon per million reads mapped (RPKM) and the more generic fragments per kilobase million (FPKM), which substitutes reads in RPKM with fragments, are essentially the same measurements [2–5]. Utilizing different quantitative measurements provided by the public databases hinders the integrative analysis. Like recount2, a project is underway to provide results from various databases through a single analytical pipeline [6]. To solve this problem, we aimed to develop a web-based application using Shiny, COEX-seq (COnvert a variety of measurements of gene EXpression in RNA-Seq) that easily converts data in a variety of measurement formats of gene expression used in most bioinformatic tools for RNA-Seq.