Protein is a primary component of living organisms that has structural and chemical roles. Among the many characters of proteins, the structural information has been a major concern for biological and pharmaceutical studies for its intimate relationship to the function of the protein. Most of the databases of protein structure utilize structure analysis, based on the 3D representation of the positions of protein atoms. The space of possible positions of atoms of proteins, however, could be described using the torsional representation of atoms along the axis of covalent single bonds. Most of the movements of atoms are actually limited to the rotations along the single bond axes, considering the rotational property of covalent single bonds and the infrequency of the change of the length and angles of the covalent bonds for high-energy barriers. The reliability of this torsional system, which represents the native processes of structural change in the structural analysis, was partially proven by previous research of structure alignment [1]. In most typical representation systems of protein structures, the 3D structure of proteins is represented by Cα atom positions on the Cartesian system. Better homology delineation was achievable by applying the torsional representation of backbone structures than a typical Cartesian system in the structure alignment. The structures of two proteins were aligned using the information of the torsion angles of Cα atoms of the backbones to compare the structural similarity. The strings of the torsion angles of the two protein backbones were compared using a sequence alignment algorithm. The conducted backbone torsion angle-based structure alignment has advantages over typical structure alignment methods from the comparison of backbone topology, rather than the general globular 3D shape of proteins [2]. The better accuracy of the torsion angle system in the structural alignment analysis was utilized for the construction of a relevant information repository. Thus, a structural information repository and analysis tool based on better structural representation of a torsional system might be appreciable. Here, the secondary structural information- and structure comparison function-providing web server, based on the backbone torsional representation of a protein structure, is newly introduced. The structure alignment function with torsion angles of amino acid backbones was supplied in a developed web server. Functions of secondary structure database search, secondary structure calculation, and protein pair-wise structural comparison are supplied. The secondary structure of protein data bank (PDB) and structural classification of proteins (SCOP) entries are supplied using MySQL infrastructure. Protein secondary structure calculation and pair-wise comparison functions are supplied, based on JAVA/JSP infrastructure.