With the emergence of large datasets in biology, life scientists are encountering bottlenecks in handling biological data. The increase of genomic data caused by next-generation sequencing technologies is leading to a continuous decrease in the effectiveness of conventional genomic browsers [26]. Most genomic browsers are principally used for visualizing the genomic features and a user's genomic data [26]. In order to visualize genomic features, different genomic browsers are available on the web, such as Ensembl [27] and University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) [28]. Some genomic browsers represent gene annotations as horizontal data tracks. For example, the UCSC genomic browser represents annotations as a series of horizontal tracks over the genomic sequence. In this browser, each track presents a specific type of annotation [28]. In comparison to the paradigm of horizontal data tracks applied by genomic browsers, the GIS application uses the concepts of a LR technique to present genomes in a dynamic manner, where users can define/change attributes of genes in a table and interactively see the gene events on genome layers. A previous study of a GIS application in genomic data management employed the concepts and tools that were defined for displaying the geographic data to develop GenoSIS. GenoSIS was proposed to spatially represent genomes and interact with genome-related attribute data [16]. However, this system is based on a fixed linear data model, which presents the genome as a linear feature with associated attributes. The system is fixed in the sense that defining new or changing gene attributes requires users to graphically draw new lines and change the GIS file (i.e., genome shapefile and geodatabase file). Moreover, this system lacks the ability to semantically represent genome-related information, where information can meaningfully be interpreted by software agents and can be shared between different biological applications. One of the most interesting capabilities of GIS compared to existing genomic browsers is its ability to make complex attribute and spatial queries. A GIS query is a user-defined request that examines genome/gene layer or tabular attributes based on user-selected criteria and displays only those features or records that satisfy the criteria. The proposed application has the potential to store, represent, visualize, and analyze genome-annotated data in a dynamic manner. In addition, our application adopted ontology to organize genomic data in a semantic framework, which facilitates data sharing among biology domains, applications, and experts. During recent years, there have been many web-based developments that use ontology as their knowledge base, such as GO [21], Plant Ontology [29], and Microbial Ontology [30], etc. Ontologies define domain concepts and the relationships between them and therefore provide a domain language that is meaningful to both machines and humans [30]. In the present study, we used Protégé, which contains a query interface known as the SPARQL query panel, through which users are able to query particular information from the ontology [30].
However, the proposed application in this study is subject to some limitations. One of the limitations is that the application is not able to represent all genomic data (e.g., sequences) and can not make a query on several genome event layers simultaneously. Another limitation is related to the lack of powerful inference engines to reason genomic data for the purpose of data sharing. Effective inference engines are required to semantically interpret data and exchange them with their intended meanings. One source of limitation is also related to the fact that the application is available on desktop; future research is required to develop an online version of the application and a data server consisting of microbial genome databases for browsing genome-annotated data.
Our work continues toward future plans, including the extension of this application to develop an ontology-based GIS interactive database for rumen microbial communities. Effort is already under way for developing such a comprehensive database to contain a wide spectrum of rumen microbial genomes.