The advances in genomics technologies and other molecular research, together with recent developments in information technologies, have generated a great quantity of data in the molecular biology domain [1]. For example, GenBank, as a comprehensive and well-known database of National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) online resources, holds nucleotide sequences for more than 280,000 species that are available to the public [2]. Another example of large biological datasets is the 2013 edition of the annual Nucleic Acids Research database issue, which currently lists 1,512 databases, organized into 14 categories and 41 subcategories, available at http://www.oxfordjournals.org/nar/database/a/ [3].
Among organisms, rumen microbes have not been an exception to these debates. But, much less attention has been paid to integrate and manage the genomic data related to these microorganisms. Molecular research on ruminal microbes has gained attention as more genomic sequences and related genomic data are becoming available to scientific communities. The primary focus of this study was to develop an application that allows users to interactively manage the genome-annotated data of rumen microbial consortia. The rumen environment is the main part of the digestive system and consists of a complex microbial community that makes the rumen microbial ecosystem [4]. This ecosystem is a natural habitat that houses a wide spectrum of bacteria, protozoa, anaerobic fungi, and bacteriophages [5]. By having a symbiotic mutualistic relationship with ruminants, the microbes are capable of converting feed components into a source of energy for the animals (i.e., volatile fatty acids). Ruminants are able to utilize a variety of feeds owing to an extremely diversified rumen microbial ecosystem [4]. According to previous molecular studies, it has been reported that the population of rumen bacteria accounts for at least 300 to 400 phylotypes [6,7,8].
There is no doubt that progress in biological research could not be achieved without equivalent efforts in informatics research. Since data management and analysis are facing new challenges in parallel with the age of big data, many research activities have been conducted for handling the biological data. There are several special issues that reflect the ever increasing importance of data management approaches in biology [9,10,11,12,13].
Geographic information system (GIS) is a computer-based system designed for displaying, storing, manipulating, and analyzing geographical data [14]. As an analytical system, GIS can serve biological systems by establishing biological databases, with the use of powerful representation and display tools, as well as providing query and analysis tools. An example of a GIS query is finding all hospitals that are equipped with an advanced technology, located in the city center, and with more than 500 beds. A number of GIS-based approaches have been used to handle biological information. A typical example in the biology domain is discussed by Kozak et al. [15], in which they applied GIS technologies and concepts for evolutionary biology. Their study uses the GIS to track macroevolutionary changes among species and the evolutionary process of geographic variation within species. In previous studies of GIS applications in genomics, a major effort was made by Dolan et al. [16]. They presented a GIS application, called Genome Spatial Information System (GenoSIS), to manage and represent genomic information.
Ontology is about terminology (domain vocabulary), all essential concepts in a domain, their classification, taxonomy, relations (including all important hierarchies and constraints), and domain axioms [17]. It represents the particular meanings of concepts by specifying the concepts and their relationships. The use of ontology enables one to structure biological data (genome/gene data) in a machine-understandable form by defining biological concepts, relationships, and instances in a semantic structure.
This paper presents an integrated GIS-ontology application for the management of microbial genome data. The main rationale behind integrating GIS and ontology is that these two distinct areas of research can complement each other for biological applications. While the GIS is commonly recognized as a powerful and integrated tool with unique capabilities for storing, manipulating, analyzing, and visualizing geographical information, ontology provides a rich collection of procedures and algorithms to meaningfully share and exchange data. Our application is implemented by using ArcGIS and Protégé to couple GIS-based biological applications with ontology. The genome-annotated data of rumen microbial flora were adopted to evaluate the performance of the application. The system can be extended and employed for handling other types of genomic data.