Neuropeptides are produced from precursor proteins (or prohormones) by a series of enzymatic processing steps. The neuropeptide precursors generally do not have functions on their own, requiring processing to generate the active forms. The precursors are synthesized on ribosomes at the endoplasmic reticulum and processed through the Golgi [5]. When the NH2-terminal signal peptide of the neuropeptide precursors is cleaved by signal peptidase, the precursors are routed to the Golgi apparatus and packaged into dense-core secretory vesicles together with processing proteases, termed convertases. Most neuropeptide precursors are first processed by endopeptidases, including prohormone convertase 1 (also known as prohormone convertase 3) and prohormone convertase 2 and, to a lesser extent, prohormone/proprotein convertase 5A (also known as prohormone/proprotein convertase 6A) [6]. The endopeptidases typically cleave at pairs of basic amino acids, usually Lys-Arg (KR) or Arg-Arg (RR) sites, but on occasion, the basic amino acids are separated by 2, 4, or 6 other amino acids (Fig. 1). The next stage of processing is the removal of C-terminal basic residues in the mature secretory vesicle. Carboxypeptidase E is the exopeptidase primarily responsible for removing the C-terminal basic residues, and carboxypeptidase D has also been shown to act in this role. After removal of the C-terminal basic residues, other enzymes perform additional post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as amidation, acetylation, phosphorylation, sulfation, and glycosylation [6]. For example, peptides with a C-terminal glycine are typically converted to the amide by peptidyl-α-amidating monooxygnenase [7], and tyrosine sulfation is known to be mediated by tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase [8]. These final bioactive forms of the peptides are stored within secretory vesicles that are accumulated within the cells. When the cells are stimulated, the secretory vesicles are known to fuse with the cellular membrane to release the neuropeptides into the extracellular environment [2]. The secreted neuropeptides can interact with receptors containing specific binding sites. The receptors are often G-protein-coupled receptors. The interaction of the neuropeptides with the receptors causes a conformational change in the receptor, resulting in the production of a cellular response through a variety of mechanisms, depending on the type of receptor.
While a single neuropeptide precursor often produces multiple neuropeptides, the proteolytic processing of the precursor protein occurs in a tissue-specific and even region-specific manner. A classic example is the processing of the precursor proopiomelanocortin in the pituitary. In the anterior lobe of the pituitary, the precursor is converted into adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which binds to several subtypes of melanocortin receptors, such as MC2R, located in the adrenal gland; this receptor controls the production of glucocorticoids (cortisol) [910]. In the intermediate lobe of the pituitary and also in the brain, ACTH is further processed into alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, which binds to melanocortin receptors with completely different affinities [11]. The PTMs can also regulate the bioactivity and stability of the neuropeptides and therefore affect the binding affinities of the neuropeptides for the receptors. For example, acetylation of the N-terminus of β-endorphin removes the ability of the peptide to stimulate opioid receptors and to produce analgesia [6]. Conversely, octanoylation of the peptide ghrelin on a serine residue is essential for the binding of the peptide to its receptor [12]. Although the various aspects of peptide synthesis, including PTMs, lead to an increase in neuropeptide complexity, unveiling new peptides and unreported peptide properties is critical to advancing our understanding of nervous system function.