Early metagenomic studies focused mainly on investigating less complex ecosystems and specific targets in a given environment due to high sequencing costs, ecosystem complexity, and lack of high-performance computing and bioinformatics tools. Much work has been done on testing new molecular techniques and tools and discovering novel enzymes and taxonomic lineages rather than testing many scientific hypotheses. This is why many previous and even current studies are not sufficiently replicated in experimental design. Of course, it is possible to compare the difference between metagenomic studies, which are not replicated [106]. However, it enables us to obtain statistically meaningful and biologically more relevant conclusions if larger sample sizes with more replicates are provided at a deeper layer of the sequencing regimen.
For inferring statistically meaningful differences between metagenome samples and exploring metabolic/taxonomic diversity in a given sample, metadata should be provided and standardized according to a proper rule. More standardized formats for describing marker genes, genomes, and metagenome datasets were recently suggested in minimum information about any (x) sequence checklists (MIxS) [107]. This standardized format makes it possible to do many statistical analyses and meta-analyses across metagenomic studies by providing more standardized contextual information about the environment sampled as well as experimental and sequencing information. Centralizing contextual information will become more common in future metagenomic studies.
Aside from experimental design and contextual data, metagenomic data have inherent limitations that must be overcome in the future. Metagenomic reads commonly show a relatively low genomic coverage compared to that of a single genome, and the short length of sequencing reads makes only fragmented information by the incomplete assembly and annotation processes accessible. Initiatives are already under way for filling the gap between metagenomic reads by doing co-assembly with single-cell genomics [108] and joint analysis between multiple metagenomes simultaneously [109], on the assumption that the same species must exist in different samples and that the co-occurrence helps extract shared information. The ultimate goal of metagenomics is a comprehensive understanding of our ecosystem. In the near future, metagenomics will be one of the essential parts of viewing our ecosystem through integration with other '-omics' approaches such as metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics.