Studies have shown that aberrant epigenetic modifications including aberrant DNA methylation and histone modification are significantly involved in the dysregulation of genes with their potential roles in cancers [41]. However, identification of the exact elements of HOTAIR as well as their interaction has not been discovered yet. This study was aimed to find and highlight different regulatory elements by data integration. We identified putative regulatory elements that contribute to the regulation of HOTAIR expression by in silico analyses. Identification of these elements suggests new understanding of HOTAIR expression and might help to design future studies on this lncRNA which has oncogenic role in different cancers [42–45].
First, we tried to show different isoforms of HOTAIR RNA transcribed through alternative mechanisms. Since a recent study suggested the important role of HOTAIR domains in its function [46], we propose studying the molecular roles of different RNA isoforms in future researches. Then, in order to find alternative and potential features involved in generation of RNA isoforms, we checked the putative TSSs, promoters, and polyadenylation sites. We found different features, which are potentially involved in alternative transcription of HOTAIR gene.
Considering the potential involvement of methylation beyond CGI-promoters in human cancer, we focused on potential CGIs of HOTAIR. According to the fact that function of DNA methylation seems to be varied with context, we tried to find any relation between the CGIs and other compositional features such as TSSs, promoters, enhancers, DNase I hypersensitivity sites, and CTCF binding sites. Alterations in DNA methylation are known to cooperate with genetic elements and to be involved in human carcinogenesis. The results showed different CpGIs in the HOTAIR locus and determined their epigenetic status through integration analysis. The methylation status of these CGIs needs to be revealed in future researches. The methylation analysis will be so important because we currently know that most CGIs located in TSSs are not methylated. However, CGI methylation of the TSS is associated with long-term silencing. In addition, CGIs in gene bodies are sometimes methylated in a tissue-specific manner [47]. It has been reported that methylation of a CTCF-binding site may block the binding of CTCF. Altogether, different CpGIs overlapped with genetic elements seem to have important roles in controlling HOTAIR.
Some repeat sequences and single nucleotide polymorphisms exist within or next to the predicted CpGIs. We think that repeat number variations may effect on methylation status of regulatory regions of HOTAIR gene. Different studies reported some associations between polymorphisms of HOTAIR and cancers risks. The examples are the association between rs920778 [48], rs4759314 [49], and rs12826786 [25] and gastric cancer, rs7958904 and colorectal cancer [50], rs920788 and breast cancer [51], rs4759314 and rs7958904 in epithelial ovarian cancer [52]. We found that some SNPs are located within regulatory regions and so may effect on the gene expression. Also, since the repeat sequences of HOTAIR gene might contribute to the methylation status of regulatory regions, we highlighted the overlaps between these sequences and the predicted CpGIs.
Due to the overlap with active promoter, strong enhancer, CTCF binding site, DNase I hypersensitive sites, SNPs, and repeat sequences, CpG165 seems to be more important compared to other CpGIs for generation of the long RNA isoform. However, according to the Fig. 3, considering the overlap with other structural features, other CpGIs within the gene structure also seems to be involved in gene regulation. This integration model should be checked and validated in future experimental works.
Altogether, it seems that alternative transcripts of HOTAIR originate from interactions between genetic and epigenetic elements. Our data provide strong evidence based on the databases and in silico prediction that specific sequence motifs may potentially be involved in DNA methylation states of various set of CGIs in different tissues including normal and tumors. Our study suggests that the combinatorial binding of specific transcription factors plays a major role in regulation of HOTAIR expression. Future work that aims to provide detailed maps of epigenome in normal and diseased states is crucial to our understanding of HOTAIR role in cancer pathogenesis.