dPCR experiments
Initially, three different dPCR systems (QX200, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA; RainDrop, RainDance Technologies, Billrica, MA, USA; QuantStudio 3D, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) were tested to compare their sensitivity and accuracy using SNP rs543840 (A/G) with 10 ng of control genomic DNA having one of three known genotypes (AA, AG, or GG). For the quantification of cfDNA in transplant patient plasma and urine, the Bio-Rad QX200 dPCR system was used with 3.5 µL of isolated sample cfDNA. All reactions were prepared using the manufacturer's standard protocol (Bio-Rad). Each reaction contained 10 µL of 2× ddPCR Supermix for Probes (Bio-Rad), 1 µL of 40× TaqMan Probe (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 3.5 or 5 µL of cfDNA (1:20 diluted cfDNA in the case of mtDNA detection) as template, and the distilled water necessary to reach a total reaction volume of 20 µL. Droplets were generated using the QX200 droplet generator (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer's protocols. The PCR cycling conditions were 95℃ for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 94℃ for 30 s and 60℃ for 60 s, with a final 10-min incubation at 98℃. Droplets were read in the QX200 droplet reader, and analyzed using the QuantaSoft software, version 1.6.6 (Bio-Rad). We measured the positive counts of each allele directly, or the calculated counts of each allele based on a Poisson distribution. These values were then used to express the minor allele (donor DNA) counts as a percentage of the total DNA counts. In case of homozygous donors (two A alleles) and recipients (two B alleles), the donor DNA counts and percentages were easy to calculate because the donor DNA counts were simply the positive counts of the A allele. However, in case of heterozygous donors (A and B alleles) and homozygous recipients (two B alleles), the corrected donor DNA counts were calculated by doubling the total positive counts of the A allele, whereas the corrected recipient DNA counts were calculated by subtracting the total positive counts of the A allele from the total positive counts of the B allele. Finally, the donor DNA percentage was calculated as the corrected donor DNA counts divided by the total positive DNA counts, multiplied by 100.