In this study, we carried out the microarray-based profiling of DNA methylation and gene expression in peripheral white blood cells obtained from obese and normal children. We investigated whether the DNA methylation or gene expression profiles (1) are distinct between the young obese individuals and controls, (2) show unique enrichment patterns of hyper-vs-hypomethylated CpG sites with respect to nearby genes or CGIs, and (3) whether such enrichment patterns are also observed for CpG sites that are differentially methylated between young obese individuals and controls.
We first examined whether the gene expression or DNA methylation profiles could be used to distinguish the obese individuals from the normal control individuals. Unsupervised clustering of the DNA methylation profiles segregated the obese individuals from controls, suggesting that the young obese individuals harbor epigenetic marks in their peripheral blood cells that are distinct from those of normal controls. For marker selection, we further performed leave-one-out-cross-validation, k-nearest neighborhood (k-NN) method-based marker selection, and predictive modeling. For 12 rounds of iterations, we selected the top 100 differentially methylated sites using the empirical Bayes approach and predicted the phenotypes of the selected cases. However, we did not achieve a good classification accuracy using jackknife approaches for cross-validation for the gene expression datasets or the DNA methylation profiles. The results imply that obesity cannot be completely predicted by a small number of candidate biomarkers. Instead, our genome-wide analyses showed that there are aberrant DNA methylation patterns in obese children compared to normal children.
Abnormal DNA methylation patterns have been observed in wide variety of human diseases. Certain studies suggest that abnormal DNA methylation patterns in some of these diseases include the loss of DNA methylation on gene bodies and the gain of DNA methylation on gene promoter CGIs, which is by and large the opposite of the normal physiological methylation pattern found in the human genome [2526]. Our analyses revealed that the majority of the differentially methylated CpG sites are those with relative hypomethylation in obese children. Such obese-hypomethylated CpG sites were overrepresented in gene body regions and represented one of the major epigenetic alterations in the blood cells of young obese individuals. In addition, our results implied that regulatory CpG sites near TSS in obese individuals tended to be relatively hypermethylated compared to controls. This observation was further validated by the evaluation of chromatin status using chromHMM data, where the combined analyses showed relative hypermethylation of regulatory regions (active, weak, and poised promoters) but hypomethylation of transcribed regions (those annotated as transcription transition, elongation, or weak transcription) in obese individuals compared to controls.
When we searched for differentially expressed genes using the same criteria as those used for the differentially methylated CpG sites, a relatively small number of genes with a p < 0.001 and a corresponding FDR of 0.91 were identified (Supplementary Table 2). Given the fact that the expression-based k-NN predictive model failed to identify obese individuals, the gene expression profiles may not serve as appropriate biomarkers of obesity in youth. However, we found that some of the top-ranked genes were also related to epigenetic regulation. For example, histone deacetylases (HDACs) are related to insulin sensitivity, and HDAC inhibition can be a treatment for diabetes. Moreover, since HDAC2 can directly bind to DNMT1, a widely expressed DNA methyltransferase that plays a role in maintaining DNA methylation patterns [27], the change in HDAC2 expression may be related to the aberrant DNA methylation patterns we observed in obese individuals.
Our pilot study provides a line of evidence for the importance of epigenomic characteristics in investigating childhood obesity and also the potential utility of such markers for the early diagnosis of obese children. Blood represents a mixture of multiple types of cells, the composition of which has been reported to vary between obese and lean individuals. For example, through analysis of blood cell fractions, a study verified that DNA methylation in B cell and natural killer lymphocytes is altered in obese subjects [28]; other studies have reported similar results [2930]. The cellular heterogeneity and the differing number of blood cell counts between individuals could affects DNA methylation analysis [31]. Thus, further investigation of the DNA methylation profiles, with consideration of the cell heterogeneity in blood, may lead to a clearer understanding of the epigenomic differences in obese children.
To date, a number of genome-wide studies have presented associations between inherited germline variants and metabolic disorders, such as type 2 diabetes and obesity. However, a majority of patients still lack clarity on the causal, heritable factors underlying their disease, suggesting that there are still many limitations to overcome for these germline markers to be practically used for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. Measuring the alterations in DNA methylation profiles detectable in blood as a minimally invasive biological resource may be useful not only in understanding the epigenomic effects on obesity, but also in providing critical insight and clinical applications for the early detection of obesity. However, our findings were obtained from a relatively small cohort (n = 6), so the statistical power was limited. Thus, the interpretation of the results from our pilot study requires caution. Further investigation to ascertain the clinical impact of our results is needed in a larger, independent cohort of young obese individuals. Additional studies integrating genetic and epigenetic information could unveil clues that deepen our understanding of the pathogenesis of obesity and that help to improve the diagnostic and prognostic markers for use in the clinic.