The selective cellular barrier controlling drug delivery into the brain has been identified by the over-expression of MRP2 in capillary endothelia, astrocytes, and neuronal cells in previous studies [5, 26, 27]. In this study, we found that the g.-1774del genotype in the promoter region up-regulated the expression of MRP2. Patients with g.-1774del showed resistance to ADRs by increasing the expression of MRP2, followed by a decrease of drug concentration in the brain. Our data supported this hypothesis and verified an association between g.-1774delG and ADR.
The difference of luciferase activity between g.-1774G and g.-1774del in neuronal SH-SY5Y cells was not large. However, they showed extensive differences by statistical analysis (p < 0.05 by t-test). Because the expression level of MRP2 is lower in brain neuronal tissue than in hepatic tissue, even a little change is thought to be important. The luciferase assay of MRP2 promoter activity has not been conducted in brain capillary endothelial cells yet. In this cell line, SNP function is thought to be more effective, since MRP2 is more highly expressed in endothelial cells than in neuronal cells [28].
In reality, if MRP2 and other transporters are overexpressed in the brain, most patients should be not only non-ADR but also resistant to drug therapy. However, allele and genotype frequencies of g.-1774delG were not different between drug-resistant and drug-responsive patients (p > 0.05). The absence of a strict definition of drug-resistant epilepsy may have weakened the statistical analysis. The selected grouping was only a foundation for retrospective chart review. If the definition was stricter-for example, at least one seizure per year or non-seizure over the year-the different frequencies of g.-1774delG within each group would have been more significant. An accurate study design and definitions are a key part of effective pharmacogenomic studies [2]. Standards for association studies in pharmacogenomics have been presented in previous studies [2].
In spite of the retrospective study design, an association with g.-1774delG was noticeably significant. This SNP was reported previously in our group in relation to toxic hepatitis [24]. In that study, the g.-1774del genotype caused lower expression of MRP2 than g.-1774G in a human hepatocyte-originated cell line (HepG2). This finding is contrary to the results of the present study. There are different known transcription factors in hepatocytes and neuronal and endothelial cells. The promoter activity in the cells transfected with a g.-1774G (haplotype 2) clone was about 100 times stronger than those transfected with the control vector in hepatic cells. A strong transcriptional activator is present in hepatocytes. However, the difference in promoter activity between g.-1774G and mock control was lower in neuronal SH-SY5Y cell lines. Neuronal transcription factors are expected to be weaker than those in hepatocytes. The binding sequence is "AAAAACAACAAGATAA" (the underlined C is the anti-sense sequence at g.-1774G). Transcription factors that are known to bind this sequence are GATA-1, Evi-1, FOXO, HNF3, and more (Genomatix software GmbH). Each tissue-specific transcription factor binds this sequence and induces different levels of MRP2 expression. For example, HNF3, a common activator in hepatocytes, was thought to activate MRP2 expression through binding with g.-1774G rather than g.-1774del. Consequently, the expression of MRP2 of g.-1774del would be lower than g.-1774G. In contrast, if neuronal cell transcriptional activators were more likely to bind g.-1774del over g.-1774G, neuronal expression of MRP2 of g.-1774del would be higher than g.-1774G. The factors that bind to this region have yet to be determined. Previous studies have referred to the different binding factors of this region in human coronary artery smooth muscle cells without specific identification.
In the present study, a luciferase assay demonstrated that VPA stimulated the activity of the MRP2 promoter in SH-SY5Y cells. VPA is a well-known histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that induces apoptosis in cancer cells [29, 30]. In normal cells, however, VPA activates chromosomal transcriptional ability by inhibiting HDAC. Chromosomal DNA forms a compact nucleosome with histone proteins and needs to be unpacked in order to start transcription. HDAC removes the acetyl group in acetyl-lysine residues and biologically inhibits the activity of transcription [31]. In neuronal SH-SY5Y cells, VPA could activate the MRP2 promoter by inhibiting HDAC. MRP2 has farnesoid X receptor, retinoid X receptor (RXR), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor/RXR binding regions. VPA interacts with these proteins and regulates the expression level of MRP2 protein [32, 33].
P-gp polymorphisms have repeatedly been associated with drug response in epilepsy [25, 34-37]. Up to now, however, the only functional studies of MRP2 have been conducted in a knockout animal model [38]. This report is the first investigation to show an association between MRP2 polymorphisms and ADRs in epilepsy. These results may be useful in tailoring AED medication. The G allele of the MRP2 promoter was associated with ADRs to VPA in Korean epileptic patients. The del allele of MRP2 protected the brain against adverse effects of VPA by over-expressing MRP2 in brain neuronal cells. These data will help design therapy to minimize ADRs in epileptic patients and aid in the development of new AEDs. However, further independent replication studies are needed to unequivocally confirm the association.