IUA/OAuth 2.0
Genes, proteins, and neuroimages require tight security, because they are very sensitive information in terms of personal information privacy. To use such information, medical standards should be complied and proper guidelines should be used. Our study uses the IUA method by IHE, which provides medical standard guidelines [45].
IUA is an IHE profile based on access control with token-based authentication and provides access authority to medical information services and guidelines for user authentication. The IUA guideline is seen in Fig. 1.
It can grant only necessary authorities to other users according to database policy and can also provide other services in a single server, which means that it has an excellent scalability. In addition, when authorization is obtained from one authorization server, it allows the authority to use the information related to a certain user. For an authorization client to use the resource, it is necessary to obtain an authorization token from the authorization server. Authorization token holders need to check the terms of validity before using it. In case the term expires, they need to get new authorization tokens. A database environment is suitable for using other data, such as genes, proteins, and brain images, and can protect patients' data systematically. In this study, IUA is used to build a database applied with a medical information standard and OAuth 2.0 to be applied to standard IUA guidelines.
OAuth 2.0 is a protocol with authorization function to control and manage access to web services. The HTTP RESTful method is used to perform access control using an authorization token and to ask an authorization server for resources [10]. HTTP RESTful is a method to request services through a URL. Because it uses data messages in the form of JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), which is small in size, it is mainly used for mobile services at present [11]. OAuth 2.0 uses Transport Layer Security (TLS) to give and take authorization tokens and messages. There are four authorization methods. Because the authorization method differs by scenario, load in a server should be considered. It should support scalability for a large service. In addition, the service provider and authorization server are completely separate; so, server multiplexing and authorization server multiplexing are possible.
There are four authorization methods: authorization code grant (ACG), implicit grant (IG), resource owner password credentials grant (ROPCG), and client credential grant (CCG). ACG and IG are re-direction methods and should interact with resource owners and receive requests. ROPCG is an authorization method in which a client receives a resource owner's authorization information directly and relays it to the authorization server. CCG can provide requests only with an authorization token.
Complicated methods, such as ACG and IG, are not needed in a database environment for analysis, because the level of trust between users and providers is high. In addition, CCG can not be used, because resources have to be used. Therefore, ROPCG is the most appropriate method for IABio.