It is now well known that mammalian genomes encode, in addition to protein-coding genes, RNA molecules that have no protein-coding capacity, and thus are referred to as non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) [1]. Recent high throughput sequencing data suggest that there are about four times as many ncRNA transcripts as there are protein-coding RNA transcripts in human cells. While some ncRNAs, such as ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), transfer RNAs (tRNAs), and those well-studied ones including microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), are recognized as functional molecules, the majority of ncRNAs and their biological roles in mammals are underappreciated, as evolution would have favored against such gratuitous and wasteful transcription [2]. However, accumulating evidence has exhibited a remarkable degree of their involvement in many biological events including cell proliferation, cellular stress responses, host immune responses and virus replication [3456]. Based on their size, ncRNAs are classified into long, medium, and small ones. Those longer than 200 nucleotides (nt) are termed as long (or large) ncRNAs (lncRNAs) and include the majority of nuclear ncRNAs. Those ranging 40-200 nt are medium-sized ncRNAs including many classic ncRNAs such as 5S rRNA, tRNAs, small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), etc. ncRNAs shorter than 40 nt are termed small ncRNAs (sncRNAs) that have been extensively studied in the last two decades and will be elaborated in the next section. In this review, we will focus on a recently discovered class of sncRNAs called tRNA-derived RNA fragments (tRFs), as data from several groups including those from us suggested them to be emerging functional molecules.
The functionality of ncRNAs was initially bolstered by the discovery showing that sncRNAs are capable of mediating both transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene silencing [7]. The most extensively studied among them are miRNAs that regulate target mRNAs post-transcriptionally in animals and plants [8910]. Another class of sncRNAs is siRNAs that are closely related to miRNAs [11]. Although naturally occurring siRNAs have been reported to be present in some mammals in addition to plants and flies [1213], siRNAs are more renowned as an experimental tool in mammalian cells. The gene silencing by synthetic double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) and their Dicer-cleavage products (that are siRNAs) is called RNA interference (RNAi) and has been being used as a popular gene knockdown method [3]. This technical breakthrough was well recognized and celebrated by the 2006 Nobel Prize, which was awarded to the two scientists who discovered RNAi [1415]. A number of other sncRNAs have also been identified in various organisms [1617], including piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA), repeat-associated siRNA (rasiRNA), tiny ncRNAs (tncRNA), heterochromatic small RNA (21U-RNA, hcRNA), scan RNA (scnRNA), transcription initiation RNA (tiRNA) [18], and promoter/termini-associated sRNA (PASR/TASR) [19]. Although some of these have been shown to play roles in several biological processes such as heterochromatin formation and transposon silencing, their functions are largely unknown and detailed description of them is beyond the scope of this review [10].
Mature tRNAs are characterized by their evolutionarily conserved secondary and tertiary structures, extensive post-transcriptional modifications (up to 100 nucleoside modifications have been described), extreme stability and resistance to nucleases [202122]. There are more than 600 tRNA genes in humans, which are far more than needed for at most 64 anticodons and 20 amino acids [232425], suggesting gene-specific functions of tRNAs other than its traditional function in linking a codon to the cognate amino acid during translation. Indeed, tRFs were recently identified as a new class of sncRNAs fragmentized from tRNAs and shown to be important in regulating cell proliferation, stress-induced translational suppression, stress granule (SG) assembly, and virus replication. Expression of some tRFs is commonly seen among different organisms, further supporting that tRFs have emerged as important players in diverse aspects of biology.