Lung cancer, the most common cause of cancer-related death in men and women, is responsible for 1.38 million deaths annually, as of 2008 [1]. The main types of lung cancer are small-cell lung cancer (approximately 19%) and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC; around 80%). Although NSCLC is sometimes treated with surgery, advanced and metastatic NSCLC usually responds better to chemotherapy and radiotherapy (RT) [2]. RT, either alone or in combination with surgery or chemotherapy, plays a major part in NSCLC management. Tumor radioresistance may greatly reduce the efficiency of RT for NSCLC [3]. RT of a primary tumor accelerates metastatic growth in mice [4]. These invasive and metastatic mechanisms are associated with the recruitment of complex and numerous classes of proteins, including cadherins. Specifically, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a key role in the degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Augmented MMP expression and its activity are associated with advanced tumor stage and poor survival. Elevated plasma levels of MMP-9 have been found in lung, breast, and liver cancers during RT [5, 6]. In addition, MMP-9 from sublethally irradiated tumors promotes Lewis lung carcinoma cell invasiveness and pulmonary metastasis [7]. Recently, MMP inhibitors were shown to block radiation-induced invasiveness of human pancreatic cancer cells [8]. In addition, expression of β-catenin plays a pivotal role in maintaining the integrity of cellular functions [9].
Ionizing radiation (IR)-induced double-strand DNA breaks ead to activation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM), which responds through autophosphorylation and activation of DNA repair pathways, including phosphorylation of histone H2AX (γ-H2AX), a signal for recruitment of molecular DNA repair complexes. In addition to a role in DNA damage repair, H2AX is required for DNA fragmentation during apoptosis and is phosphorylated by various kinases in response to apoptotic signals. ATM stimulates IR-induced cycle arrest through activation of checkpoint kinases; p53; and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, such as p21 [10]. Moreover, poly(ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP), which is involved in DNA repair in response to environmental stress [11], helps cells maintain their viability, and cleavage of PARP serves as a marker of cells undergoing apoptosis [12]. IR also induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress via upregulation of GRP78 and GRP94 in rat intestinal epithelial cells [13]. The level of C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) expression is elevated during ER stress, and CHOP-deficient cells have enhanced survival when challenged with toxins that induce ER stress, suggesting that CHOP functions to mediate programmed cell death [14].
Syntrophins are intracellular peripheral membrane proteins of 58-60 kD, originally identified as proteins enriched at the postsynaptic apparatus [15]. The three syntrophin isoforms, α1, β1, and β2, are encoded by different genes but have similar domain organizations [16]. Syntrophins consist of a C-terminal syntrophin unique domain and an N-terminal pleckstrin homology domain, split by insertion of a PDZ domain. Although syntrophins have been recognized as an important component of many signaling events, such as insulin secretion, synapse signaling, and migration regulation [17-21], little is known about the involvement of syntrophin beta 2 (SNTB2) in radioresistance.
In the present study, we established radioresistant NSCLC H460R cells. We tried to analyze these cells in response to IR to identify SNTB2 among upregulated genes in radioresistant H460R cells and to provide new insights into the involvement of SNTB2 in radioresistance.