We have analyzed 10 exome sequencing samples and SNP chip data using a variety of bioinformatics methods. According to the concordance results, comparing with SNP chip data, we concluded that the G10.N exome sample is not the correct pair. Comparing SNPs between normal and tumor pairs revealed that the normal-tumor pair of sample G06 was not matched, and the G10 exome showed abnormal LOH in chrX but had no somatic mutation. So, we had removed G06 and G10 for discovering somatic mutations.
After removing G06 and G10, with 8 paired-end samples, we discovered 27 functionally important somatic mutations with significance. They included well-known genes in AML, such as NPM1, IDH2, GATA2, and CEBPA. Especially, NPM1 and GATA2 were found in 2 out of 8 samples.
In sample G05, we found one abnormal region at chr1 and an LOH region at chr13. We could conclude that the LOH region could potentially make a fusion gene by INTS6 and KIAA1704, and we did further network analysis on that. The results of IPA analysis gave "Cell Death and Survival, Cell Cycle" network as the top network, and it includes GATA2 and MAST2 (somatic mutation).
We had done IPA analysis with 26 genes, giving the "Cancer, Hematological Disease, Cell Cycle Network" as the top network, and it includes NPM1, GATA2, and CEBPA, which are well-known driver genes in AML [3]. Since those 3 genes have many edges in the result, we could conclude that those genes are indirect evidence of driver genes.
The second network is related with "Cell Death and Survival," and it includes IDH2 and PHF6 genes, the same as G05's top network. So far, our conclusion is that 8 samples are related with the "Cancer, Hematological Disease, Cell Cycle Network" but sample G05 is related with the "Cell Death and Survival Network."
We had searched previous works of genome-wide somatic mutation discovery and concluded that 8 exome samples might be AML. Somatic mutation profiles of blood cancer are summarized in Table 5 [3, 9, 10]. But, we could not find any somatic mutations in the FLT3 or RAS gene. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia and Blast Crisis chronic myeloid leukemia did not have somatic mutations in NPM1 or CEBPA.
Seven out of 8 samples showed neither LOH nor SCNA, so we could conclude that those patients had a normal karyotype with no translocation or inversion. If possible, additional RNA-Seq experiments or another technique can provide enough evidence of karyotypes of those samples.
In CEBPA, IDH2, and NPM1, we saw somatic mutations located in helix regions. By using protein structure modeling, we found that IDH2, RASGEF1B, and MSH4 could have structural variations, affecting protein functions. Somatic mutations in IDH2 could break hydrogen bonds.