One of the critical problems encountered in the serological diagnosis of NC is the differential diagnosis from other parasitic infections. Cross-reactions that arise from other larval cestodiases, such as alveolar and cystic echinococcoses (AE and CE, respectively), and sparganosis should be ruled out, since these larval cestodiases frequently provoke serological cross-reactions [29].
For the serological differentiation of NC from sparganosis, the diagnostic properties of TsM CF proteins were compared with those of parenchymal extracts. CF showed a higher antibody detection capability than parenchymal extracts. Sera from NC patients cross-reacted with the sparganum extracts, and the TsM antigen showed cross-reactions to the sera of patients with sparganosis. Approximately 50% of the sera from sparganosis patients exhibited cross-reactions against TsM parenchymal extracts (Fig. 1A and 1B). This finding suggested that some NC patients might produce IgG antibodies against TsM antigenic proteins, which are common in sparganosis and non-specifically bind to sparganum extracts. The antigenic components that caused the cross-reaction were not a single protein, but multiple proteins (Fig. 1B).
When sera from NC patients were examined by immunoblot, TsM CF exhibited a variety of reaction patterns. Several protein bands revealed positive antibody responses, of which the bands at 7, 10, 15, 20–40, 43, 64, 95, 106, and 160 kDa were strongly reactive (Fig. 1B, panel CF). The 10 kDa component showed the strongest reaction, with 84.6% of the samples (209 of 247) being positive [28]. Although the reaction pattern of the parenchymal extracts was similar to that of the CF, more numerous bands ranging from 43 to 100 kDa were reactive with sera from NC patients. In general, high-molecular-weight proteins above 47 kDa were shown to be cross-reactive both with TsM parenchymal extracts and with sparganum extracts, while the low-molecular-weight proteins (LMWPs) (ranging from 7 to 24 kDa) in CF showed specific antibody reactions. Our research group observed similar results for serological cross-reactivity with AE and CE. High-molecular-weight proteins typically revealed cross-reactions [28,29]. Those antigenic bands did not seem to be the same molecules as the major antigenic proteins of TsM. This result further suggested that TsM CF is suitable for the differential diagnosis of cysticercosis from other cestodiases, as well as better than parenchymal extracts for the serodiagnosis of cysticercosis [20,28].