In BLAH5, a small experiment was conducted as an attempt to map Japanese medical terms to MeSH, using open English-Japanese vocabularies, by first mapping Japanese terms to English terms, and the resulting English terms mapped to concepts in MeSH, which have the term as either its heading or one of its entry terms.
In our endeavor, we first used the English Wikipedia. From this, we retrieved Wikipedia entries (via DBpedia), with MeSH UIDs in the infobox, and Japanese language links were retrieved. The number of English Wikipedia entries with the MeSH UIDs was 2,719, of which 1,136 had links to Japanese Wikipedia entries. The number of distinct MeSH UIDs was 1,102, of which 1,075 were assigned to one Wikipedia entry. The remaining 27 UIDs were mapped to more than one term, but the relationships of the terms assigned the same UID were not always synonymous. Those other undesirable relationships included hypernym-hyponym (e.g., D003117 for Dichromacy and Color blindness; dichromacy is a type of color blindness) and cause-results (e.g., D006471), for Gastrointestinal bleeding and Hematochezia; hematochezia is a result of gastrointestinal bleeding). Further investigation is left for future work.
Second, use of open English-Japanese glossaries, for Japanese-English mapping and matching of English terms to the MeSH UID, was attempted. For this preliminary experiment, the MeSpEN English-Japanese glossary, a part of the multilingual medical glossary [4], developed by the Spanish National Cancer Research Center and the Barcelona Supercomputing Center (the version in this experiment was downloaded from http://temu.bsc.es/mespen/downloads/glossaries.tar.gz), was used. The English-Japanese glossary had 27,668 entries, although 18,325 unique English-Japanese ones were duplicate entries. Simple (lower-cased) matching against MH (heading) and MN (entry terms) of the MeSH 2018 descriptors, assigned the MeSH UIDs to 5,866 English-Japanese pairs. From this process, the number of unique MeSH UIDs assigned to these pairs was 2,955, and matched the remaining pairs to MeSH 2018 supplementary concepts (having assigned UIDs), leaving a remaining 1,725 pairs (1,173 unique UIDs).