These normal baro-reflex responses cause an increase in heart rate and vascular resistance, restoring normal BP and cardiac output [1]. OH is the failure of the cardiovascular reflexes to maintain BP on standing from a supine position [2]. Also, the frequency of OH in families with a history of essential hypertension may be higher than in the general population [4]. Therefore, the identification of genetic factor for orthostasis will help us understand OH mechanisms.
The signal plot for the most significant SNP (rs6736587) is depicted in Fig. 2; the region was intergenic and a functional gene was located 1 Mbp upstream. Interestingly, this region is known as the chromosome 2p12-11.2 deletion syndrome region, and several cases report mental or psychomotor retardation [19, 20]. There was only one gene, CTNNA2 (or known as alpha-N-catenin), around ±1 Mbp. CTNNA2 is a linker between cadherin adhesion receptors and the actin cytoskeleton and is essential for stabilizing dendritic spines in rodent hippocampal neurons [21]. Although there is no report about function in BP regulation, hippocampal neurons interact primarily with the autonomic nervous system. Therefore, the CTNNA2 gene may function in orthostatic BP regulation.
Among the other SNPs, rs7098785 was located in the phosphoinositide-3-kinase adaptor protein 1 (PIK3AP1) gene. PIK3AP1 is involved in B-cell development [22]. Interestingly, in silico analyses by the UCSC genome browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu/) indicated that the SNP was located in a DNase I hypersensitive region and in the binding site of transcription factors (MEF2C, BATF, MEF2A). Therefore, the rs7098785 SNP might have a regulatory function of PIK3AP1 expression.
The remaining three SNPs of dtDBP were located in the ACTBL2 (beta-actin like protein 2) 3' flanking region, STAR intron, and intergenic region (chromosome 6p 25.2). The ACTBL2 protein is involved in various types of cell motility [23], and STAR is involved in the regulation of steroid hormone synthesis [24].
Our study was the first trial to identify genetic variants for orthostatic BP traits in Koreans. We hope that our finding could help us understand the underlying mechanism of orthostatic BP changes and related diseases.