Molecular descriptors
Molecular fingerprints: MACCS keys, PubChem, and Klekota-Roth fingerprint
Molecular fingerprints are binary bit string representations that capture diverse aspects of molecular structure and properties and are popular tools for virtual screening [19]. In this study, three fingerprints-MACCS keys [20], PubChem fingerprint [21], and Klekota-Roth fingerprint [22]-were tested to be compared with the Tanimoto coefficient and other descriptors. The descriptor numbers of the MACCS, PubChem, and Klekota-Roth fingerprints are 320, 881, and 4860, respectively. The MACCS keys of each ligand were generated by a MACCS key generator, and the other two fingerprints of the ligands were calculated by PaDEL-Descriptor [23].
EVA descriptor
An ideal molecular descriptor should encode all the features of a molecule in numerical form. EVA, based on the normal coordinate eigenvalues, is derived from calculated infrared range vibrational frequencies and consequently has the characteristic feature of molecular-specific vibration. The resulting vibrational frequencies were then convolved using a sum of Gaussian functions to generate a pseudospectrum of 3N-6 overlapping kernels: , where N is the number of atoms, σ is a fixed standard deviation of the Gaussian function, and fi is the i-th frequency of the molecule. We fixed the value of σ to 5 cm-1 in this study.
CIMVF descriptor
For a simplified comparison of the molecular vibration patterns, the calculated molecular vibrations of a ligand were sorted in increasing order and taken into each corral with a fixed step (e.g., 5 cm-1) size. The intensities of each molecular vibrational frequency in the same corral were summed up as the representative of the corral. As a molecular descriptor of a ligand, the intensity of each corral is displayed in a 1-dimensional vector containing 800 elements from the vibrational frequency range of 0-4,000 cm-1. The calculations of CIMVF were performed by in-house scripts written in Python.
EVA and CIMVF descriptors were produced from PubChem SDF data of ligands through geometry optimization and calculations of molecular vibrations with the GAMESS program package [24]. The similarity matrices obtained from these five cases of molecular representations were subjected to hierarchical clustering using complete linkage method.