Admixture
Even though previous studies with Neanderthal mtDNA [26, 33] and initial sequencing of nuclear DNA showed no evidence of interbreeding between Neanderthals and humans [21, 53], the most striking revelation after the comparative analyses between the whole-genome sequence of Neanderthals and multiple modern human individual genomic sequences was the demonstration of admixture between these two species. Green et al. [27] compared the Neanderthal genome with eight modern-day human genomes of European Americans, East Asians, and West African ancestry. Surprisingly, the Neanderthal genome appeared more similar to all non-African genomes than to African ones. They share significantly more derived alleles (alleles that are different from in chimp) with non-African populations than with the African, and when compared with European and Asian individual genomes, Neanderthals are found equally close to both populations. This and some other analyses made by the group only indicate an exchange of DNA between Neanderthals and the non-African population. With further comparative analysis, the same group also identified that gene flow occurred unidirectionally from Neanderthals to the modern non-African human population.
A couple of other findings from different experiments, along with a genome-wide comparison, provide strong evidence for exchange of genetic information. The first finding involves the MAPT locus in chromosome 17, which has two distinct haplotypes, H1 and H2. H1 is abundant in almost all populations of modern humans, while H2 is found only among Europeans and found to have entered into the Homo lineage approximately only 10,000 to 30,000 ya. However, a comparison between H1 and H2 in chimp suggests that the common founder of H1 and H2 is far older than 30,000 years. Even though the Neanderthal genome sequence has been found to carry the H1 haplotype, coinhabitation of the H2 chromosome carriers during the time period when modern humans coexisted with archaic humans can not be ruled out because of the scarcity of archaic genome data. Thus, one can still argue that the H2 haplotype found in modern humans could possibly be a result of horizontal gene transfer between modern humans and Neanderthals and remained in modern humans under selective pressure, possibly because the H1 haplotype has a role in neurodegenerative diseases [54]. In a similar scenario, haplotype D of the microcephalin gene is found to have originated 1.1 mya in a lineage other than modern humans but integrated into the modern human genome only about 37,000 ya. It has thus been speculated that this haplotype was horizontally transferred into modern humans from archaic humans, most likely Neanderthals [34]. However, in a more recent study, the microcephalin locus from a Neanderthal individual in Italy was sequenced and found to be homozygous for the ancestral non-D haplotype [55]. The whole-genome study by Green et al. [27] does not support these speculations, either, since the Neanderthals they analyzed do not carry these D-haplotypes.
One striking revelation from the whole-genome comparison by Green et al. [27] is the equal level of similarity of the Neanderthal genome with Papuan and Chinese and French, although fossil records show the existence of Neanderthals only in Europe and western Asia. The group explained this anomaly by arguing that the interbreeding between the species occurred earlier than previously expected, before the divergence of Europeans, East Asians, and Papuans. Archaeological evidence suggests that modern humans appeared in the Middle East before 100,000 ya, where Neanderthals were already present, and probably remained until 50,000 ya [56]; this makes the prediction by Green et al. [27] probable.