In our previous research, we demonstrated that the first intron is special compared with other introns for the following reasons: it is the longest intron; it has the largest proportion of conserved sites among introns; it harbors the highest proportion of TASs among introns; and it is the most enriched with various chromatin regulatory signals. Moreover, chromatin regulatory signals are significantly linked to the level and breadth of gene expression. In the 8 present study, we added further evidence, proving that the first intron carries functional sequences (i.e., sequences for locating various active or repressive epigenomic marks) by analyzing the proportions of rare alleles in the chromatin marks located within introns.
Unfortunately, the influence exerted by intronic sequences on the control of gene expression has yet to be experimentally proven. Experimental studies have demonstrated links between some intronic mutations occurring at the sites of splicing regulation or miRNA binding and certain diseases [18,19]. However, controversy remains regarding whether intronic alterations can directly cause changes in gene expression. According to Nott et al. (2003) [20], gene expression of the same coding genes was not affected by the absence or presence of introns. Moreover, some studies argued that intronic sequences evolve through neutral evolution due to the absence of selective constraints, and that their evolutionary rates are faster than fourfold degenerate sites [7,21].
The difficulty in experimentally proving the functions of intronic sequences in gene regulation seems to be mainly due to the complexity of the epigenomic chromatin signals that exist in different combinations in different cell or tissue types. Moreover, gene expression patterns are controlled by highly complex combinatorial interactions among these regulatory signals.
Although the functional importance of introns has not yet been experimentally proven, our findings provide support for the proposal that intron sites, particularly those in the first intron, are subject to natural selection. We suggest that regulation of gene expression is likely to ultimately emerge as a function of the sites implicated as being subject to natural selection.