MicroRNA and cancer
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a class of small noncoding RNAs that have epigenetic functions in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression via mRNA degradation or sequestering and translational repression and have physiologically essential roles in most cellular processes. Therefore, their dysfunction is implicated in human diseases, including cancer, as well as inherited diseases and developmental defects. The human genome may encode over 1,400 miRNAs, which frequently target many genes related to cancer development or prevention [22]. In light of the linkage between miRNA and cancer, they have been categorized into three groups: oncogenic, tumor-suppressive, or context-dependent miRNAs [23]. In tumorigenesis, the loss of tumor-suppressive miRNAs promotes the expression of target oncogenes, while increased expression of oncogenic miRNAs can repress target tumor suppressor genes [23]. Mutations in a miRNA can disrupt its recognition of binding targets and further result in oncogene activation and/or tumor suppressor repression. Indeed, oncogenic miRNAs, such as miR-155, miR-21, and miR-17 to -92, whose expression triggers cancer development, appear to be amplified, and tumor suppressive miRNAs, such as miR-146 and miR-15 to -16, whose loss triggers cancer development, appear to be downregulated in cancers [23]. Moreover, mutations of miRNAs, including miR-101 and miR-29, targeting epigenetically modifying enzymes, such as EZH2 [24, 25] and DNMT3 [26], respectively, are often found in human cancers. Aberrant expression or mutation of such miRNAs is likely to further reinforce extensive and heavy epigenetic alterations [23, 27] and might have effects on histone or DNA methylation at promoters of other miRNAs that target oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Underexpression of miR-127, which targets BCL6, is correlated with abnormal methylation at its promoter in cancer [28]. In the course of remarkable progress in the study of cancer epigenetics, new observations linking aberrant miRNA expression and tumorigenesis imply that miR-mimic molecules might serve as effective therapeutics by replacing tumor suppressor miRs or targeting oncogenic miRs.