Metabolic syndrome (METS) is a disorder of energy utilization and storage and increases the risk of developing cardiovascular disease and diabetes. METS includes multiple clinical traits, as follows: increased plasma glucose, abdominal obesity, dyslipidemia, and high blood pressure [1]. METS is a great concern in developing countries, because the prevalence of METS is gradually increasing, especially in countries where it follows obesity trends, sedentary lifestyle, and high consumption of calories [2, 3, 4]. A Korean twin study showed that the METS has 51%-60% heritability, indicating a significant role of genetic factors in the development of METS [5]. Therefore, understanding the genetic factors underlying the syndrome and their correlation is clinically important.
Recent advances in high-throughput genomics technologies have allowed massive testing of genetic variants in minimal time [6, 7]. The reductions in cost and time have made it feasible to conduct large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) that genotype many thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in thousands of individuals. So far, approximately 1,900 reports with 13,000 SNPs (GWAS catalog; Apr 14, 2014) have been published to identify the gene-disease or -non-disease trait associations. The quantitative traits related to METS have already been studied by the conventional GWAS in the Korean population [8], but there is no Korean GWAS report about METS cases and controls.
On the other hand, relatively little trait heritability can be explained by the conventional GWAS [9]. These phenomena, called missing heritability problems, are hard to solve by conventional GWAS, in part because of the extensive multiple testing correction in GWAS analysis, low effect size of common variants, and the difficulty of detecting low-frequency or rare variants in conventional GWAS. Multiple testing correction is necessary to exclude false-positive loci, but simultaneously, it discards many true-positive loci [10]. Also, most SNPs in these GWASs lie in intergenic and intron regions and do not appear to affect protein sequence. Thus, these SNPs are likely functionally neutral or just proxies of causal variants located in the same linkage disequilibrium (LD). To understand the amount of true-positive signals in the discarded association results, we computed the proportion [V(G)/V(P)] of the phenotypic variance [V(P)] that is explained by the genotype variance [V(G)] using the significant and discarded SNP results [11].
Recently, Fransen et al. [10] reported a GWAS using expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) information. They selected eQTL among the GWAS results for Crohn's disease and conducted follow-up replication studies [10]. They showed that eQTL-based pre-selection for follow-up is a useful approach for identifying risk loci from a moderately sized GWAS.
Based on previous knowledge, we applied an alternative analysis strategy to understand the genetic components of METS. First of all, we conducted a conventional GWAS for METS cases and healthy controls to discover the top significant signals. Thereafter, we tried to uncover the functional variants, such as nonsynonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) and eQTLs, among the SNPs to be discarded using the stringent criteria of the conventional GWAS. Finally, we drew a pathway of the significantly associated GWAS SNPs and the remaining less significantly associated functional SNPs. The overall study design is schematically described in Supplementary Fig. 1.