In this study, we presented the process of building prediction models, based on clinical variables and high-dimensional RNA-Seq data for HSGC patients provided by the TCGA GDC portal. The specific steps were as follows: gene filtration, pre-screening, gene marker selection, and integrated study of selected gene markers with the final prediction model.
To put more emphasis on the clinical variables, we applied modified penalized Cox regression. We first selected clinical variables that had major impacts on the survival outcome of HGSC, and then, we found genes using these clinical variables with higher weights than genes in the penalized Cox regression. As shown in Table 5, six clinical variables and three genes were chosen as the markers for prognostic prediction. While these three genes were reported to be associated with HGSC, no significant results were found in the single-gene analysis.
When analyzing data, a single marker alone may not be sufficient to explain the outcome. For example, the RENIN gene itself cannot distinguish survival patterns of ovarian cancer patients well. However, a model that includes additional gene markers can contribute to improving the predictability by further explaining the areas that cannot be explained by clinical variables [20].
Furthermore, it is important to keep in mind that the issue of false positives can arise, since the analysis is conducted with a relatively small number of samples compared to the number of genes. Therefore, it is important to determine which genes to use in the Cox model by considering the appropriate gene filtering criteria.
We proposed procedures for building prediction models for predicting survival outcomes by integrating RNA-Seq data and clinical information for HGSC. The approach in this study is general, in the sense that it may not be highly dependent on the characteristics of the cancer type or other types of biomarkers. Therefore, this predictive model development process could be easily applied to other types of cancer.
In the future, we hope to apply our approach to other types of genomic data, such as DNA methylation and copy number alterations. In addition, we want to build our integrative prediction model to predict survival times more accurately for other cancer patients.