Function of TMPRSS4 in the regulation of EMT and invasion
In colon cancer cells, TMPRSS4 induces downregulation of E-cadherin and leads to EMT events, accompanying morphological changes and actin reorganization [38]. Suppression of TMPRSS4 by siRNA reduces cell invasion in colon and lung cancer cells, while overexpression TMPRSS4 induces migration, invasion, and metastasis [38]. Attachment and spreading of cells on the ECM, with concomitant formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions, is a prerequisite for cell migration. TMPRSS4 also modulates cell-matrix adhesion and cell spreading mainly through modulation of integrins, such as α5β1, which has been centrally implicated in the EMT and cell motility [39, 40], which probably contributes to enhanced motility and invasiveness. One of the molecular mechanisms by which TMPRSS4 mediates the EMT and invasiveness in tumor cells is that TMPRSS4 mediates focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signaling pathway activation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation, mainly through integrin α5 upregulation, leading to the EMT and invasiveness. Furthermore, TMPRSS4 overexpression in human colorectal cancer tissues positively correlates with enhanced expression of integrin α5 and inversely correlates with E-cadherin expression, confirming that TMPRSS4 modulates expression of EMT markers. Recently, Larzabal et al. [41] reported that miR-205 is involved in TMPRSS4-induced integrin α5 expression in NSCLC cells. To further implicate TMPRSS4 in the EMT, Cheng et al. [42] suggested that interactions between HGF activator inhibitor (HAI-1) and TMPRSS4 contribute to EMT events, including E-cadherin reduction and morphological changes in pancreatic cancer cells. In addition, TMPRSS4-induced E-cadherin reduction and EMT play a critical role in radiation-induced long-term metastasis of residual HCC in nude mice [43].
Interaction of TMPRSS4 and integrin α5, based on the observation that TMPRSS4 partially interacts with integrin α5 under certain coimmunoprecipitation conditions in a cell line-dependent manner [35] (Kim S, unpublished observation), suggests the possibility that TMPRSS4 may modulate or participate in the interaction of integrin and other cell surface proteins (for example, tetraspanin, receptor tyrosine kinases, etc.), leading to subsequent signaling transduction activation. In fact, TMPRSS4 can interact with urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR; CD87) [44], which can induce the EMT in hypoxic breast cancer cells [45], although it is not clear whether TMPRSS4 interacts with uPAR directly or via integrin(s).
Loss or reduction of E-cadherin expression is a well-known hallmark of the EMT and correlates positively with tumor cell invasion and metastasis [3]. TMPRSS4 appears to modulate SIP1/ZEB2 expression, based on the observation that SIP1 mRNA is upregulated in TMPRSS4-overexpressing colon cancer cells, although induction of SIP1 at the protein level remains to be determined. Therefore, it is possible that SIP1 mediates TMPRSS4-induced EMT events, including E-cadherin reduction.
Several studies have shown that suppression of high endogenous E-cadherin expression renders non-invasive cells partially invasive [46], whereas reconstitution of E-cadherin results in tumor cell reversion from an invasive mesenchymal phenotype to a benign epithelial phenotype [46, 47]. In contrast, other studies have shown that ectopic expression of E-cadherin could not reverse EMT phenotypes induced by the transcription factor Twist1 [10]. On the other hand, downregulation of E-cadherin was required for TMPRSS4-mediated EMT and invasion in colon cancer cells but was not sufficient for induction of these phenotypes [35], suggesting that downregulation of E-cadherin is not the sole contributor to TMPRSS4-mediated phenotypes. In this respect, upregulation of specific mesenchymal markers, such as integrin α5, besides the downregulation of E-cadherin by TMPRSS4, may be required for full invasiveness during colon cancer progression (Fig. 1).