Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) plays an important role in the metabolism and transport of lipids. It hydrolyzes triglycerides (TGs) in lipoproteins, such as chylomicrons (CMs) and very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), into free fatty acids, releasing CM remnants and intermediate-density lipoproteins that act on high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC) metabolism. Plasma LPL therefore plays an essential role in elevating HDLC and lowering TG [1-3].
While HDLC plays a role in the removal and transport of cholesterol from peripheral tissues to other tissues where it is required, such as the liver, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) is, conversely, transported from the liver to peripheral tissues. The concentration of lipids has been tightly associated with the risk of cardiovascular diseases [4-6]. Specifically, LDLC levels have been shown to have a positive log-linear association with the risk of coronary heart disease: a reduction of 1% in the serum concentration of LDLC has been shown to reduce the relative risk of coronary heart disease risk by approximately 1% [7], whereas an increase of 1 mg/dL in serum HDLC levels is associated with a decrease in the risk of coronary heart disease of approximately 2% to 3%, independent of LDLC levels [8]. It was also reported that TG levels are associated with risk of cardiovascular disease, independent of concentrations of other lipids and cardiac risk factors, although there has been controversy [6]. Recently, a report based on the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys I, II, III, and IV has indicated that the prevalence of dyslipidemia and hypertriglyceridemia in this country has increased during the last decade [9]. Genetic association studies aimed at identifying the genetic factors associated with variations in lipid concentrations have been performed mostly for Europeans, and they have shown that the polymorphisms in the LPL gene, including the 3' flanking region, are strongly associated with HDLC and TG levels [10-13]. There is a report of a candidate gene approach for lipid concentrations in a Korean population, but the LPL gene was not included in the study [14].
The concentration of lipids is also influenced by environmental factors, such as smoking, alcohol consumption, diet, and physical activity, as well as genetic factors [5, 15]. However, studies about the influence of interactions between LPL polymorphisms and lifestyle factors have not been sufficiently performed. In this study, we examined the effects of potential interactions between LPL polymorphisms and lifestyle, as well as genetic variations of the LPL gene, including the 3' flanking region, on the lipid profile of a Korean population.