Crocodilians (Crocodylia) are extant large-sized reptiles found throughout the tropics in freshwater lakes, rivers, and oceans. Crocodilians diverged from birds, their closest living relatives as Archosauromorpha more than 240 million years ago (MYA). Ancestral crocodilian species first appeared in the fossil record around 80 MYA during the Late Cretaceous [1]. Extant crocodilians contain 25 species, classified into two families: Alligatoridae (comprising genera: Alligator, Caiman, Paleosuchus, and Melanosuchus) and Crocodylidae (comprising genera: Gavialis, Tomistoma, Mecistops, Osteolaemus, and Crocodylus) [2]. These crocodilians share both ancient and recent morphology as well as ecological characters [1]. The understanding of the phylogenetic history and biogeography in this lineage has provided a fascinating study for evolutionary biologists.
A phylogenetic approach for crocodilians was originally conducted based on fossil records. These suggested that the Indian gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) was a basal crocodilian [1]; however, molecular datasets indicated that Alligator diverged from the remaining crocodilians around 50~70 MYA in the Tertiary, of which Crocodylus are the most recent group (Fig. 1) [3456789101112131415161718192021222324]. This suggested that Alligator was the most ancient crocodilian; however, relationships among living species of Crocodylus remain poorly resolved, since they radiated into various species around 9~13 MYA during the middle of the Miocene [16]. These issues have received high priority in modern systematics by combining many datasets to determine the true groupings and divergences among them. One possibility is the level of different chromosome constitution, though crocodilians exhibit slow divergence of karyotype among living species. However, various karyotypic forms in the lineage are probably the source of reproductive isolation, which eventually radiated into species diversity.
Remarkably, chromosomal investigation of 23 crocodilians revealed karyotypic features: small diploid chromosome numbers (30~42), the predominance of a few large chromosomes, and the absence of dot-shaped microchromosomes whose centromere positions are undetectable [1920]. This contradicts with the karyotypes of birds (the sister group of Archosauromorpha), and the relative lineage of turtles, which contain a small number of macrochromosomes and many indistinguishable microchromosomes [2025]. The increase of large bi-armed chromosomes and the presence of small chromosomes probably correlate with the reduction of medium acrocentric chromosomes and the absence of microchromosomes, respectively, in these lineages [2526]. The chromosome arm number or fundamental number (NF, bi-armed chromosome: metacentric or submetacentric = 2; uni-armed chromosome: acrocentric or subtelocentric = 1) of all crocodilian karyotypes shows little interspecific variation (56~60), and no sex chromosome heteromorphism has been recognized in any species [192027]. These characteristics of crocodilian karyotypes indicated that very few chromosomal rearrangements have occurred in Crocodylia, except for centric fusion and/or fission events. To delineate the role of chromosomal rearrangement, which also plays an evolutionary force in crocodilian diversity and evolution, the karyotype data and phylogeny were summarized as (1) variation of chromosome constitution within crocodilians compared to other sauropsids (birds and reptiles), (2) current phylogenetic history of crocodilians from molecular data and paleontological perspective, and (3) correlation of chromosomal rearrangements in each lineage and phylogeny in crocodilians.