Microsatellite (MS) markers have remained a popular choice for parentage verification since two decades now. For cattle there is a standard set of nine MS markers recognized as “international marker set” recommended by international society of animal genetics (ISAG) which need to be included in the parentage testing panels to facilitate record exchange between laboratories. So far, MS markers have successfully been implemented in cattle and other livestock species. However, as the cost of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping has decreased, more and more new animals are being genotyped with SNP chip panels. For parentage testing all the animals are required to be genotyped with same type of markers. So either new animals should be typed with MS markers or old animals that are usually typed with MS markers should be typed with SNP markers. In both the cases, it will incur an additional cost. So in order to shift from MS to SNPs, McClure et al. [1, 2] suggested imputation of MS markers from SNP genotypes. This method will provide a cost effective and accurate choice for replacement of markers for parentage verification. Depending upon the relationship amongst the sampled individuals generally 2‒3 SNPs per MS are needed to obtain the accuracy good enough for genetic identification and assessment of parentage [3]. Fernandez et al. [3] found that a set of 24 SNPs were equivalent to the ISAG recommended set of international MS markers.
The term “genotype imputation” refers to the prediction of missing genotypes, i.e., genotypes that were not directly genotyped in the sampled individuals [4]. Imputation requires a reference population that has all the markers genotyped for all the samples. This reference population is then used to predict the genotypes in the target population which contains missing genotypes or missing markers. Imputation of genotypes has become a common practice in genome-wide association studies, fine mapping of QTLs, genomic predictions and whole genome based diversity studies. Since denser chips are known to perform better in the downstream analysis many laboratories use imputation to move from low density to high density SNP’s [5]. The accuracy of imputation also depends on the density of the SnipP-chip, denser it is better predictions it would make [6]. Ogawa et al. [6] found higher accuracy of imputation when they used 10,000 SNPs instead of 3,000 for genotype imputation in Japanese black cattle. Accuracy increased from 90% to 97% with the increase in number of SNPs. Several factors that affect imputation accuracies include minor allele frequency of the SNPs in the reference population, size of the reference population, genetic relationship between the reference and test populations [7] and linkage disequilibrium between the imputed SNP and the SNP on the target data [8].
Imputed data can provide accurate results in the downstream analysis only if the accuracy of imputation is high. In this study we report the accuracy of imputation of MS markers, from the BovineSNP50 and BovineHD BeadChip in Hanwoo cattle of Korea. Comparison between two SNP panels was made to identify the SNP panel and SNP subset that gives the best accuracy such that the overall cost of genotyping could be reduced while not having to compromise with the accuracy of prediction.