Human tissue-derived cell lines have served as an effective platform for understanding the molecular biology of diseases and increasingly for drug discovery [1, 2]. For wholesale analysis of gene sets or chemical compound files, cell line-based high-throughput screening is typically performed on a well-to-well basis in high-density microtiter plates. From this, significant changes in cellular phenotype by each perturbation in a given library compared to mock controls or other samples are identified. Examples of perturbations include synthetic small molecules, natural products, cDNA expression libraries, and, of primary focus here, genomewide collections of short interfering RNAs (siRNAs). It is a truism that cell-based screens are highly vulnerable to environmental variations. In particular, siRNA screens involve multiple processing steps employing automatic or semiautomatic liquid-handling equipment carried out over many days. Each step introduces position-specific variables and distinct operational failures. This, combined with unavoidable batch effects from cell cultures and reagent efficacy, can introduce asymmetric phenotypic variation that is independent of the perturbations of interest. Accounting for and correcting this variation is well recognized as an essential component of successful high-throughput screening.
Statistical methods to process whole-genome siRNA screen data have been reported by others [3, 4], but limited open-source tools are currently available [3, 5, 6]. Moreover, as most available open-source tools are written in R/bioconductor [3, 6], modifications that require screen-specific command lines are challenging without prior experience in script programming. Very recently, a web-based tool (web cellHTS2) and its standalone package [5] have been published. However, they either run on a remote server or require other specialized preinstalled software.
Here, we present siMacro, a GUI-based simple tool for processing cell-based high-throughput screening datasets. siMacro has been implemented in Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) and packaged as a Microsoft Office Excel add-in. It allows one-step, fast, and easy suppression of outlier values; normalization; and standardization of a complete raw dataset from a genomewide siRNA screen in an intuitive spreadsheet format. The tool processes the data points associated with a 2-condition genomewide screen with biological triplicates on a standard laptop computer in less than 1 minute.