In this study, we performed a GWAS to investigate the associations between identified CNV regions and the risk of OF. A total of eight CNV loci were identified to be nominally associated with OF. For validation, we selected one CNV region based on position and expected biological meaning among the eight loci. The CNV, which is located on chromosome 20q13.12 (intergenic region near LINC01260) was experimentally validated through quantitative PCR.
An lncRNA is defined as a non-coding transcript having a length of more than 200 nucleotides [26] and is considered “junk” that is non-functional initially [27]. However, the functional roles of lncRNAs have now been identified, such as key regulators of transcriptional and translational products that affect cell functions [28293031]. lncRNAs play a role in epigenetic effects, such as histone modification (e.g., methylation), which regulates gene expression [32]. A significant histone modification, monomethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4me1) in human mammary epithelial cells, was predicted in our identified CNV region near an lncRNA, LINC01260, using University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser (http://genome.uscs.edu/cgi-bin/hgGateway) (Supplementary Fig. 4). A previous genome-wide study has identified several runs of homozygosity (ROHs) associated with BMD and observed the enrichment of H3K4me1 in two ROHs, ROH15q22.3 and ROH1p31.1, by an analysis of histone modification marks in the Gm12878 cell line [33]. Taken together, our identified CNV region on 20q13.12 might have a putative effect on the risk of OF by histone modification of the promoter region of LINC01260.
In addition, a CNV on chromosome 20q13.12 is located in a region about 35 kb apart from the WISP2 gene. The WISP2 gene has some evidence of functions associated with bone-related traits. WISP2, also known as CCN family member 5 (CCN5) or connective tissue growth factor like (CTGF-L), was identified as a member of the CCN family, downstream of the WNT–β-catenin signaling pathway, using subtractive hybridization between WNT1-transformed mammary epithelial cells and parental cells [34]. The WNT–β-catenin signaling pathway has been suggested to be a major component in the accrual, regulation, and maintenance of bone mass [35]. WISP2 consists of 3 domains: an insulin-like growth factor binding domain, a von Willebrand Factor type C motif, and a thrombospondin type I repeat. The mRNA of WISP2 is expressed in primary human osteoblasts, fibroblasts, ovary, testes, and heart. WISP2 protein is secreted from primary human osteoblasts and fibroblasts [36]. A previous study has shown the relatedness of increased mRNA expression of WISP2 with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis [34]. Furthermore, the WISP2 gene has been reported as a candidate gene that is associated with an OF-related trait, BMD [37].
WISP2 expression is affected by the action of LRP5. LRP5 has been known to play a role in signaling through WNT–β-catenin and acts as a co-receptor with the frizzled family of receptors [38]. Previous research has reported that the LRP5 mutation (G171V), inducing the enhancement of structural strength and material properties of skeleton and bone mass, is correlated with increased expression of WISP2 [38]. Also, WISP2 is suggested to be involved in the frizzled receptors/LRP5/6 pathway by phosphorylation of LRP5 [39]. Considering the previously reported functions and interactions with LRP5 in the WNT–β-catenin signaling pathway, WISP2 could be an important component for bone formation or strength, which might affect the risk of OF.
In conclusion, we identified a total of 8 CNV regions associated with OF in the Korean population. Among the 8 CNVs, one locus, located on chromosome 20q13.12, was selected for validation and verified by quantitative PCR. Although further study in a larger number of study subjects is needed, to our knowledge, the current report is the first to investigate the association with the risk of OF. Our findings from this study could provide new insights into the genetic factors associated with OF risk.