After an OR was found to be overexpressed in human cancerous prostate and identified as a PSGR (OR51E2) [61], PSGR (OR51E2) [62], and PSGR2 (OR51E1) [63] were proven to be differentially expressed between prostate cells in malignant and benign tissues. In 2009, Neuhaus et al. [60] identified androstenone derivatives as ligands for recombinant OR51E2. Activation of endogenous OR51E2 by β-ionone resulted in the inhibition of prostate cancer cell proliferation. The mechanism of p38, including its trigger (Pky2) and a tumor suppressor protein (N-myc downstream regulated gene 1), was suggested later [65, 66]. Also, the expression of OR51E1 in microdissected small intestine neuroendocrine carcinoma cells was found to be higher than in adjacent microenvironment cells [67].
In the case of ORs other than PSGRs, mRNA overexpression of OR1D2 was confirmed in LNCap prostate carcinoma cells compared with non-prostate-derived cell lines using RT-PCR, confocal laser scanning microscopy, and fluorescence-activated cell sorting [64].
Recently, a kind of terpene, the major constituent of essential oils, was observed as an effector in cellular proliferation in hepatocarcinoma cells [68]. A human OR, OR1A2, was detected at the mRNA and protein levels and demonstrated its potential involvement in (‒)-citronellalinduced calcium signaling in the Huh7hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. Massberg et al. [68] reported that the activation of OR1A2 results in the phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and reduces cell proliferation. More recently, Kalbe et al. [54] reported that a human OR, OR2J3, in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells induces apoptosis and inhibits cell proliferation and migration with its cognate ligand, helional. NSCLC is known to be resistant to common chemotherapy, and approaches via OR pathways could be helpful for the treatment of NSCLC with the precedence of further in-depth studies. Along with the cases mentioned above, diverse types of cancer appear to have various ORs, according to their occurring tissues (Table 1).