Blood circulates through the body, affecting the tissues by delivering oxygen and nutrients responsible for tissue viability. The size, number, and concentration of a cell in the blood vary among populations, and these have been regarded as factors influencing various disorders, such as erythrocytosis, anemia, hypertension, and cardiovascular diseases. During the last 2 decades, genetic studies have revealed that there exists a genetic effect on several hematologic variables. Moreover, previous studies reported that genetic factors strongly influence the variation in the counts and size of blood cells [1, 2]. Although a few genes are known to affect hematologic traits, the physiological mechanisms underlying the traits are largely unrevealed.
Platelets are anuclear cytoplasmic fragments that play a key role in maintaining primary adhesion, aggregation, and secretion and providing procoagulant surface and clot retraction. The primary functions of a platelet count are to assist in the diagnosis of bleeding disorders and to monitor patients who are being treated for any disease involving bone marrow failure. Low platelet counts or abnormally shaped platelets are associated with bleeding disorders, whereas high platelet counts sometimes indicate disorders of the bone marrow. Platelet activation is known to affect genes associated with vascular risk factors, as well as with arteriosclerosis and myocardial infarction. Platelet count is a readily available laboratory test and has been associated with different clinical and epidemiologic factors and are tightly regulated and inversely correlated in the healthy population [3]. Furthermore, because platelet count differs between inter-ethnic groups, gender and ethnicity should be important considerations for a platelet count study [4].
Recently, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) for hematological traits have been reported [5, 6, 7]. Particularly, 68 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with platelet count were identified by a GWAS [8]. However, although the heritability of variation in platelet count ranged from 54% to more than 80% [9, 10, 11], the genetic variants reported to date explain only a small fraction of the heritability in platelet count [12]. Therefore, new studies have opportunities to unveil additional genetic variants for explaining missing heritability [12].
In this study, we conducted a GWAS to find a contribution of the genetic basis on hematologic variables, such as platelet count, in Koreans.