This study designed a predictive model for metabolic syndrome in nonobese people through machine learning using clinical information and polymorphism information obtained at a health screening. Among the various machine learning methods, NB showed the best performance, and the prediction model that included genetic information showed better performance than the prediction model designed with only clinical data.
It has been reported that people with metabolic syndrome have a 5-fold increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus, a 3-fold increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease [1], and increased cancer risk and cancer-related mortality [5–9].
Therefore, predicting the population with a high risk for metabolic syndrome and actively intervening with these individuals are very important for promoting health. Obesity is the most common risk factor for metabolic syndrome. Obesity is known to be associated with complications such as diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease [33, 34]. Obesity is clinically evident, so obese people can recognize the risk and prevent metabolic syndrome from occurring by undergoing aggressive weight loss efforts. However, metabolic disturbance can also occur in nonobese people. One cohort study reported that reduced inflammatory status, which is a metabolic syndrome pathogenesis, is observed in nonobese patients as well as obese patients [35, 36]. The problem for these nonobese patients is that without a specific biochemical test, these individuals do not know if they have developed metabolic syndrome and that they do not know if they are at risk for metabolic syndrome. The prevalence of undiagnosed metabolic syndrome in people with normal BMI is reported to be 5.2%–8.9% [37]. Therefore, predicting these factors plays a very important role in health care. To increase the predictive power in this group, we made a prediction model including genetic factors as well as clinical factors and performed analysis through various kinds of machine learning. Naïve Bayes classification showed the best performance.
The naïve Bayesian classifier (NBC) is a powerful probabilistic model that has been applied in various medical studies [38, 39]. The superiority of the NBC is that it takes all information into account to reach a decision, which is natural way for physicians to make diagnostic and prognostic decisions [40].
This study has the following limitations. First, only Korean individuals were included. Therefore, for generalization to other ethnicities, it is necessary to expand the study to include other ethnicities as well. Second, although the naïve Bayesian algorithm has the best performance, its sensitivity of 0.42 is not sufficient.
In future studies, it is necessary to improve performance by applying a deep learning algorithm.
The superiority of this study is as follows. First, we constructed a prediction model by integrating clinical information, environmental factors, and genetic information. Genetic studies of metabolic syndrome have been reported mostly for SNPs and are clinically known to be caused by several environmental factors. However, no method or algorithms have been published for integrating big data information, which is the result of these individual studies, into a metabolic syndrome prediction model for nonobese populations. In metabolic syndrome, not only the genetic polymorphism of SNPs but also factors such as age, sex, environmental factors, and lifestyle habits are all involved, and the presence of these genetic and clinical factors controls the development of metabolic syndrome. In addition, although the GWASs used in the existing SNP analysis found SNPs that are candidate markers for a number of metabolic disorders, all of the studies considered individual SNPs, and no studies have analyzed SNPs in an integrated manner. Second, machine learning was used to build predictive models. The traditional construction of models by statistical methods is mostly conducted with only clinical information, and factors in the prediction model that have borderline influence are often deleted during the model design process. Additionally, for the traditional models, it is difficult to reflect all the associations between the factors. In the case of machine learning, data and factors of borderline significance can be considered in the analysis without overlooking data that are not well known. Third, model A in our study, which is designed only using clinical information, itself has useful value in the clinical field. Model A used information such as age, sex, body mass index, smoking, alcohol consumption, and exercise. This information can be obtained easily without any special medical inspection. If a nonobese person inputs their information into the algorithms, they can be alerted to their risk of metabolic syndrome and take active interventions to prevent complications. This application can be performed by the nonobsese person himself or herself without the help of a medical specialist. After conducting a replication study in another population set and improving the performance of this model, we are planning to make it accessible as a website in the future.
In this study, a prediction model was constructed by integrating clinical information, environmental factors, and genetic information. The purpose of this study is to provide a prediction model for metabolic syndrome that is more predictive of metabolic syndrome than previous models, by using clinical and genetic markers related to metabolic syndrome specifically in a nonobese population. Using this prediction model, we could predict the group of nonobese individuals who have a high risk of developing metabolic syndrome. For the individuals in this group who previously did not feel a need to use healthcare services and were not concerned about metabolic syndrome, we could encourage them to receive health checks and modify their lifestyle to include preventive habits. This process would save them from cardiovascular disease and several cancers that are complications of metabolic syndrome. This can be used as part of a more comprehensive health care method.