Whereas many other regulatory ncRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) (Fig. 1), nc886 is transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Pol III) as evidenced by its sequence and experimental data. nc886 contains the well-conserved Pol III promoter elements Box A and B followed by an oligo-dT sequence, which is a Pol III termination signal (red colors in Fig. 2). The actual occupation of Pol III on the nc886 genomic region was consistently shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by ultra-high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq data) from several research groups [151617]. It is generally thought that Pol III activity is elevated in cancer [18]. In agreement with this idea, the nc886 expression level is high in many cancer cells relative to normal tissues (YSL, unpublished data) [5].
On the contrary, nc886 expression is silenced by CpG DNA hypermethylation in many malignancies [891920]. Methylation at CpG dinucleotides is the most common type of epigenetic modification of the mammalian genomic DNA (reviewed in Klose and Bird [21]). Some genes have CpG islands, which are blocks of sequence where CpG dinucleotides are enriched and located mostly in the promoter region. Hypermethylation in CpG islands represses gene transcription and this is one of the most frequent ways that tumor suppressor genes are silenced in cancer. Noticeably, the genomic region of nc886 has a CpG island (blue bar in Fig. 2). Many studies, done mostly on protein-coding genes transcribed by Pol II, indicate that chromatin remodeling is the prevalent mechanism by which CpG methylation silences gene expression. However, CpG methylation has barely been examined in ncRNA genes transcribed by Pol III. To the best of our knowledge, nc886 is the first and so far only case of a Pol III transcript that is silenced by CpG hypermethylation in cancer. So, nc886 should serve as an ideal model gene for studying a mechanism for epigenetic regulation of Pol III transcription.
nc886 is encoded on human chromosome 5q31 and its locus is flanked by transforming growth factor β-induced (TGFBI) and SMAD5, both of which are implicated in the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) signaling pathway (Fig. 2). Although this suggests a possible co-regulation of nc886 with these two genes, it is interesting to consider the CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), a barrier protein blocking the spread of heterochromatin (reviewed in Ong and Corces [22]). ChIP-seq data from the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) indicate that there are two CTCF binding sites at each side of the nc886 region (brown bars in Fig. 2), suggesting that the chromatin status of nc886 is being insulated by CTCF. According to our unpublished data, nc886 seemed to be co-regulated with its flanking genes in some cancer cells but not in others. Given the established role of the TGF-β signaling in cancer, it will be interesting to investigate the involvement of TGF-β in the regulation of nc886/TGFBI/SMAD5 expression.