The frequencies of mtDNA haplogroups analyzed in our study are summarized in Table 2. We observed significant difference in mtDNA haplogroup F between athletes and controls (p < 0.05). The frequency of mtDNA haplogroup F in the control group was consistent with those of the previous study [30]. The haplogroup-determining polymorphisms for haplogroup F are 249delA, C3970T, T6392C, G10310A, and G13928C, in which 249delA is located in the noncoding region (D-loop) and the other three variants are positioned in the coding region [27, 31]. Among the polymorphisms of the coding region, only G13928C is a non-synonymous variant that causes a Ser531Thr replacement in ND5. ND5 encodes the NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase chain 5 protein, a subunit of NADH dehydrogenase that is a part of complex I for OXPHOS [27]. Previous studies have shown that the haplogroup F exhibits a low complex I activity in mitochondria and is associated with type 2 diabetes [18, 32]. Other studies reported haplogroup F to be a protective factor against various traits including Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy, hearing loss, and aging [16, 33, 34]. Thus, haplogroup F can play a functional role in the expression of various phenotypes including athlete status.
A genetic association between physical performance and mtDNA haplogroup F was also analyzed (Table 3). Here, we found that athletes with haplogroup F (60.64 ± 3.04) showed a higher Sargent jump than athletes with other haplogroups (54.28 ± 1.23) (p = 0.041). Sargent jump is a typically known test for measuring power [35]. This result is different from those observed in previous studies suggesting that mitochondria are mainly related to endurance performance [21, 22]. Interestingly, several studies reported that a few specific mtDNA haplogroups are associated with sprint performance [22, 27]. Fuku et al. (2012) [22] found that the macrohaplogroup N contributes to stronger leg extension power and higher vertical jump in Japanese adults (p < 0.05). Mitochondria regulate the intracellular calcium dynamics, which contribute to muscle contraction [36]. In this context, it has been previously reported that the macrohaplogroup N exhibits higher calcium levels in mitochondria compared with the macrohaplogroup M [37]. This indicates that the macrohaplogroup N may influence anaerobic performance such as muscle power. The mtDNA haplogroup F is a subhaplogroup of the macrohaplogroup N (http://www.phylotree.org). Meanwhile, Mikami et al. (2011) [27] recruited 139 Olympic athletes (79 endurance/middle-power athletes, 60 sprint/power athletes) to understand the genetic correlations between mitochondrial haplogroup and elite Japanese athletes. This study observed that the frequency of mtDNA haplogroup F in sprint/power athletes was higher than in the control group (OR, 2.79; 95% CI, 1.28 to 6.07; p = 0.007) [27]. The authors emphasized the role of haplogroup F in inducing glycogen breakdown, which is then used as a fuel for glycolysis required for skeletal muscle contraction. Furthermore, anaerobic capacity (sprint performance) prefers the glycolytic pathway compared with OXPHOS to acquire ATP [22]. Thus, our result supports a previous finding. However, further replicative studies in various populations are warranted.
A limitation of the current study was the relatively small sample size. The sample power of association analysis in our study was 73%. The ideal sample power of association analysis is reported to be approximately 80% [38]. Therefore, larger sample sets are required to further clarify the role of mtDNA haplogroup F on athlete status. Also, the athlete group consisted of more than 27 sports categories, and the different physical abilities of each athlete would be cause for the heterogeneity of physical performance. Additionally, we recruited college-level athletes who were not national elite athletes. However, they were regularly trained to win official competitions.
Our study presents the following advantage: a positive association between the haplogroup F and athlete status was reported only in case of Japanese population. To the best of our knowledge, our results are the first to replicate a previous finding and hence can establish an important subject for meta-analyses as well as for further studies.
In conclusion, our results imply that the haplogroup F may have a significant effect on athlete status and sprint performance in Korean population. However, larger sample sizes and functional studies are necessary to further elucidate our findings.