Replication timing as a high-order genomic feature
DNA replication takes place at replication forks following a fixed way [70]. In the human genome, the segments of chromosomes replicate in a temporal order [71], and the whole genome is spatially segregated by replication zones of different organizations. With some replicons in one spatial compartmentalization of chromatin fired synchronously, this chromosomal unit shares the same replication timing, termed the 'replication domain.' Therefore, the genome consists of several replication domains with different replication timing and the timing transition regions.
Replication timing can be measured by two distinct methods, based on current genome technologies [72, 73, 74]. One method is to label the newly replicated DNA with chemically tagged nucleotides. Then, the DNA will be isolated from cells at various times during S phase by immune-precipitation or density fractionation. In the other method, since DNA segments that replicate earlier accumulate more copies than those that replicate late in most cells-the DNA content of a region simply reflects the replication timing. After being classified by florescence-activated cell sorting, the DNAs extracted from S phase and G1 phase cells, respectively, are compared by next-generation sequencing or microarray technologies. By either way, a replication timing profile can be generated (Fig. 3) [75].
Based on the timing profiles, a lot of progress has been made on understanding the replication program and its relationship with other genome architectures. Recent findings indicate significant links between replication timing and the features of primary genomic structures [76]. The genomic regions where DNA replicates earlier usually have more genes, fewer LINEs, and higher GC content [77, 78]. Moreover, it is noticed that DNA replication timing correlates with transcription [79, 80, 81]. Expressed genes replicate earlier, while repressed genes replicate late. Although this correlation shows a discrepancy between multicellular and single-celled organisms, it is worth noting that such works indeed reveal the striking association of replication timing and transcriptional activity in humans [77, 82, 83]. Moreover, recent findings show that replication timing strongly correlates with three-dimensional chromatin structures [84]. In Hi-C data, it has been observed that chromatin is organized into two separate compartments. Remarkably, DNA that resides in close spatial structures replicates in near time, and chromatin that interacts between two compartments is exactly at the timing transition regions. This observation suggests replication timing as an independent advanced genomic feature.