Arabidopsis thaliana is a metaphyte and angiosperm growing in Europe, Asia, and Africa. This is a small plant that is one of the widely popular model organisms, because this plant has a small genome and can be cultivated easily. Thus, much genetic research has been carried out with Arabidopsis thaliana [12]. Recently, in Arabidopsis thaliana, genetic components associated with traits or diseases have been reported through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) studies [3]. The GWAS is a powerful approach to discover genetic elements associated with various traits. The GWAS was based on 107 phenotypes. This can be grouped into 4 categories: 23 flowering, 23 defense, 18 ionomics, and 43 development traits. Although GWASs have been successful, the molecular mechanisms of genetic elements discovered through the GWAS have been elusive [4]. The molecular mechanisms of previously reported trait-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in Arabidopsis thaliana have been also elusive. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) influencing gene expression levels and splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs) changing alternative splicing patterns are useful genetic elements to explain the trait-associated SNPs. In Arabidopsis thaliana, there have been many studies to identify eQTLs, and these accumulated eQTLs have been greatly helpful for explaining trait-associated loci [567]. However, there have been few studies of the genome-wide investigation of sQTLs in Arabidopsis thaliana. Since sQTLs can change alternative splicing patterns and consequently affect various traits, those sQTLs can constitute crucial elements for the interpretation of trait-associated SNPs [8]. Here, we discover candidate genome-wide sQTLs in Arabidopsis thaliana using the IVAS package, which is a user-friendly R/Bioconductor package, to discover sQTLs with genotypes and fragments per kilobase million (FPKM) of a transcript dataset [9]. We analyzed 141 previously published matched genotype data and an RNA-seq dataset downloaded in the 1001 Genomes Data Center [10] and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database [11], respectively. To obtain the FPKM of transcripts, we processed and aligned raw RNA-seq data. As a result of the discovery using IVAS, we identified 1,694 SNPs. Furthermore, among those SNPs, we found 96 candidate sQTLs that overlapped with the list of previously published trait-associated loci [3], and of 96 sQTLs, 25 sQTLs that led to a large difference in expression ratio of alternatively targeted exons across genotypes of each sQTL were finally selected. In summary, we reported 1,694 genome-wide sQTLs and 25 candidate trait-associated sQTLs in Arabidopsis thaliana. This list of those sQTLs may be a useful dataset for sQTL utilities in Arabidopsis thaliana, as well as its neighboring species.