Through the integrated omics analysis, we could understand the reason for the inter-individual pharmacokinetic variability observed in the first-in-human trial for drug X. The GSTs are a group of phase II enzymes that play an important role in the biotransformation of various xenobiotic and endogenous compounds by conjugation with glutathione [19]. GSTM1 is a μ class isoform of GST, and the GSTM1 gene is highly polymorphic in humans. Homozygous deletion of the GSTM1 gene is observed in various ethnic groups, and its frequency ranged from 29.6% to 56.2% [20, 21]. The frequency of GSTM1 null subjects was 50% in this study, consistent with the previously reported GSTM1 null frequency in Koreans [20]. The loss of catalytic function is suggested to be reason for decreased systemic clearance of drug X in GSTM1 null subjects. This hypothesis was supported by the metabolite analysis showing that no cysteine conjugation or cysteinylglycine conjugation metabolites of drug X were observed in GSTM1 null subjects.
The effect of the GSTM1 null polymorphism on systemic exposure to drug X was reproduced in subsequent clinical trials. The GSTM1 null subjects showed higher plasma concentration and lower CL/F of drug X than functional GSTM1 subjects after multiple oral administrations (Table 3, Fig. 5). The clinical development strategy for drug X needed to be modified to reflect these results because the GSTM1 null variant was a major determining factor for drug exposure, as well as drug-related AEs, and because the frequency of GSTM1 nulls is approximately half of total population. A personalized drug development strategy applying different oral doses based on the GSTM1 genotype or switching to a different formulation with limited systemic exposure was needed for safe and efficient development of drug X. drug X is currently in clinical development as a topical formulation to limit systemic absorption.
Integrated multi-omics analysis can be a useful tool to evaluate the diverse characteristics of new drug candidates in clinical situations. The importance of integration of multi-omics data is growing in many research areas, including pharmaceutical research and development [22–24]. As shown in this case study, integrated multi-omics analysis can be used to explain the cause of inter-individual variability in drug exposure and adverse drug reactions observed in clinical development. This information can be important when making decisions for further drug development strategy.
In conclusion, integrated multi-omics analysis can be useful in early phase clinical trials for elucidating the various characteristics of new drug candidates that could not be produced through traditional clinical trial methods.