Cancer is the most dangerous disease of human and a major health problem worldwide [1]. Preclinical studies have shown that cancer is a large group of diseases characterized by the uncontrolled cell growth and spread of abnormal cells. Over the past quarter of a century, an outstanding progress in understanding of the proteins involved in cancer progression has grown, providing chances for identifying new targets for anti-cancer therapy [2, 3]. Present modes of treatment based on synthetic drugs have limited potential, because they are toxic and expensive and also alter cell signaling pathways. Natural drugs that are safe, affordable, and effective are needed to control cancer development and progression. Natural products have been used for thousands of years in the management of several diseases including various types of cancer [4]. Nimbolide was first derived from the leaves and flowers of neem. Neem (Azadirachta indica), is a traditional medicinal plant of the Meliaceae family widely distributed in Asia, Africa and other tropical parts of the world. All parts of the neem tree offer amazing potential for medicinal, agricultural and industrial exploitation and have been evaluated for antiinflammatory, antipyretic, antihistamine, antifungal, antitubercular, antiprotozoal, vasodilatory, antimalarial, diuretic, spermicidal, antiarthritic, insect repellent, antifeedant, and antihormonal activities [5].
Studies of extracts from all major parts of neem plant including the leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds, have shown promising chemopreventive and therapeutic effects in pre-clinical research [6]. Extracts of neem leaf have been reported to be non-toxic and non-mutagenic and are found to possess immunomodulatory as well as anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic properties [7]. There are many studies showing the ethanolic extract of neem leaves to possess anticancer activity. Ethanolic neem leaf extract (ENLE) exhibited anticancer activity against N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine-induced oxidative stress and gastric carcinogenesis [8]. ENLE induces apoptosis in a prostate cancer cell line (PC-3) by up-regulating the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and decreasing the level of Bcl-2 protein resulting in DNA fragmentation in prostate cancer cells [9, 10]. Many bioactive compounds are isolated from this plant among which, nimbolide belongs to the limonoid group. It is the major component of the leaves of A. indica.
Nimbolide (5,7,4'-trihydroxy-3',5'-diprenylflavanone), is a tetranortriterpenoid with a, β-unsaturated system and δ-lactonic ring (Fig. 1) [11]. It has been shown to exhibit numerous types of biological activities, including, anti-malarial [12], anti-bacterial activity [13], anti-feedent, [14] and anticancer activities [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Literature evidence reveals that α, β-unsaturated ketone structural element is responsible for the anticancer activity of nimbolide [20, 21].