A 64-year-old male presented with a cough since 2 months ago. He quit smoking 10 years ago and had smoked an average of one pack per day for 30 years. He had regular check-ups every year and had the last check-up with no abnormality 6 months ago. His chest roentgenogram showed a mass shadow in the lung. He got a percutaneous needle aspiration (PCNA) and biopsy but did not have any tumor cells. He repeated the PCNA and biopsy but developed pneumothorax (air leakage from lung) related to the diagnostic procedure. His second biopsy showed some malignant cells, suggestive of adenocarcinoma. After a staging work-up with a computed tomography (CT) scan, positron-emission tomography (PET) scan, brain magnetic resonance imaging scan, and bronchoscopy, his tumor was revealed as T2N0 clinical stage. He got a surgery based on the result of the pathology and staging work-up.
In this situation, we face unmet clinical needs of early cancer diagnosis. He was diagnosed with symptoms related to the cancer, despite his regular check-up. If we detect his malignancy before the symptoms, we can get a better result compared with the symptomatic case [8]. This imaginary patient was diagnosed with operable cancer, but as many as 60% to 70% of lung cancer patients are diagnosed with inoperable, advanced disease [9]. To diagnose the cancer sooner, screening procedures have been studied extensively in the clinical field. Lots of trials failed to show an actual benefit of screening strategy in lung cancer [10, 11], but recently, a screening trial using low-dose chest CT of lung cancer was proven to be successful [8]. Low-dose chest CT reduced the mortality from lung cancer through early detection in people with a history of at least 30 pack-years of smoking. Despite this good approach to detect early lung cancer, the reduction of mortality is 20% [8]. This advantage should be counterbalanced with the potential harmful effects of radiation exposure or false positivity [12].
One important usage of genomics should be early detection. Many biomarkers were investigated for the early detection of lung cancer-for example, circulating tumor DNA and RNA [13]. But, false positivity and false negativity of single tests prevent these tests from clinical usage. If we use multiple biomarkers using cancer genomics for the detection of early cancer, the false positives and negatives could be reduced to the level of clinical usage.
Another effective approach of early diagnosis of cancer is to select a high-risk population for screening tests. Many genome-wide association studies identified some germline single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) that are associated with the risk of cancers [14-16], and these findings suggested important potential germline markers for the definition of high-risk populations. Dr. Mardis told the case of Mike Snyder as an example of an actual application of a germline genome test [17]. He sequenced his own genome and found a higher risk of type 2 diabetes; since that time, he checked his glucose level regularly, and he detected high glucose levels at the very beginning. After that, he exercised regularly and returned to normal glucose levels. The concept of early diagnosis, like the story of Mike Snyder, can be applied to the early detection of cancer, too. If we define a high-risk population with germline genetic tests, we could focus on the use of screening tests in this population. This approach will also save money on screening tests for the whole population.
This patient had a bad experience of pneumothorax. This complication gives pain and discomfort of the sensation of dyspnea, prolongs the period of admission, and increases the cost of cancer management. This problem originated from the invasive nature of the diagnostic procedure-PCNA and biopsy using a needle, moving back and forth through the patient's fragile lung tissue. New diagnostic tools using cancer genomics-for example, identification of cancer-specific genetic alterations from circulating tumor DNA-can avoid this type of complication from invasive procedures. One pioneering study showed that circulating tumor DNA could be combined with genomic technology to diagnose and monitor the status of cancer very safely [18].