Shigella, refers to a genus of gram-negative facultative anaerobes that belongs to members of the family Enterobacteriaceae and is the causative agent of shigellosis, a severe enteric infection, one of the most common causes of morbidity and mortality among children in developing nations. The Global Burden of Disease (GBD) classified Shigella as the second leading cause of diarrheal deaths on a global scale in 2015 [1]. Shigellosis leads to the recurrent passing of small, bloody mucoidal stools with synchronous abdominal cramps and tenesmus caused by ulceration of the colonic epithelium [2]. In malnourished children, Shigella infection may lead to a vicious cycle of further impaired nutrition, frequent infection and growth retardation resulting from protein loss enteropathy [3].
The Shigella genus is divided into four species: Shigella flexneri, Shigella boydii, Shigella sonnei, and Shigella dysenteriae. These are further classified into serotypes based on biochemical differences and variations in their O-antigen [4]. A total of 19 different serotypes of S. flexneri have been reported so far by various research groups [5]. Among the four Shigella species, shigellosis is predominantly caused by S. flexneri in the developing world especially in Asia, and is responsible for approximately 10% of all diarrheal episodes among children of <5 years [6]. Recent multicenter study in Asia revealed that the incidence of this disease might even exceed previous estimations, due to Shigella DNA being detectable in up to one third of the total culture negative specimens [7]. Currently, no effective vaccine with the ability to confer adequate protection against the many different serotypes of Shigella has been developed and made available. Existing antimicrobial treatments are becoming compromised in terms of efficacy due to increased antibiotic resistance, soaring cost of treatment, and persistence of poor hygiene and unsanitary conditions in the developing world.
A particular study conducted on numerous isolates of Shigella collected over a time span of 10 years, multi-drug resistance (MDR) were found to be exhibited by 78.5% of the isolates. 2% of the isolates were found to harbor genetic information capable of conferring resistance to azithromycin, a final resort antimicrobial agent for shigellosis [8]. On the other hand, a recent whole genome analysis of a particular strain of S. flexneri revealed 82 distinct chromosomal antibiotic resistance genes while successive re-sequencing platforms elucidated several distinct single nucleotide polymorphisms that contributed to eventual MDR [9]. Therefore, the development of new drugs has risen to become a subject of immense magnitude to not only shorten the medication period but also to treat MDR shigellosis. The genome sequence of S. flexneri serotype 2a strain 2457T, available in the NCBI database consists of 4,599,354 bp in a single circular chromosome containing 4,906 genes encoding 4,362 proteins and has G + C content of 50.9% [10]. Among these, the functions of 674 proteins have not been experimentally determined till date and are termed as hypothetical proteins (HPs). A HP is one that has been predicted to be encoded by an identified open reading frame, but for which there is a lack of experimental evidence [11]. Nearly half of the proteins in most genomes belong to the class of HPs and this class of proteins presumably have their own importance to complete genomic and proteomic platform of an organism [12, 13]. Precise annotation of the HPs of particular genome leads to the discovery of new structures as well as new functions, and elucidating a list of additional protein pathways and cascades, thus completing our incomplete understanding on the mosaic of proteins [13]. HPs may possibly play crucial roles in disease progression and survival of pathogen [11, 14]. Furthermore, novel HPs may also serve as markers and pharmacological targets for development of new drugs and therapies [15]. Functions of HPs from several pathogenic organisms have been already reported using a plethora of sequence and structure based methods [14, 16, 17].
Functional annotation of HPs utilizing advanced bioinformatics tools is a well-established platform in current proteomics [18]. Cost and time efficiency of these methods also favoring their preference over contemporary in vitro techniques [19]. In this study, we have used several well optimized and up to date bioinformatics tools to assign functions of a number of HPs from the genome of S. flexneri with high precision [20]. Functional domains were considered as the basis to infer the biological functions of HPs in this case. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis [21] was used for evaluating the performance of bioinformatics tools executed in our study. We also measured the confidence level of the functional predictions on the basis of bioinformatics tools employed during the course of the investigation [22]. We believe that this analysis will expand our knowledge regarding the functional roles of HPs of Shigella and provide an opportunity to unveil a number of potential novel drug targets [17].