The incidence of KD in patients younger than 6 months and older than 5 years of age was comparatively lower than other age groups. The peak incidence of KD was in the age group between 6 months and 2 years of age. KD has no diagnostic test and the diagnosis depends on clinical symptoms. In particular, KD patients younger than 6 months of age can be difficult to diagnose because they show fewer clinical symptoms, called incomplete KD, which leads to delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis in infants. Consequently, cardiac complications are more common in KD patients younger than 6 months than in older children [16-18]. Therefore, early and accurate diagnosis of infantile KD is important to reduce the risk of cardiac complications. In this study, we analyzed GWAS data of patients younger than 6 months and older than 5 years of age to identify new risk loci for KD susceptibility in these age groups. We identified a new KD susceptibility locus in the LEF1 gene (rs4365796: c.1106C＞T, p.Thr369Met) on chromosome 4. The associated amino acid-altering SNP (rs4365796) in the LEF1 gene had an unusually strong effect size, a 3.07-fold increased risk for incidence of KD, in Korean KD patients younger than 6 months of age. This result indicates that the LEF1 gene plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of KD in very young children and this amino acid-altering variant can be used as a candidate marker to identify high risk KD patients in infant patients in a clinical setting.
The LEF1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is expressed in developing B and T cells and at multiple sites of organogenesis during embryonic development [19-21]. LEF1 is a central mediator of the Wnt signaling pathway through recruiting β-catenin and plays crucial roles during development, including normal hematopoiesis [22, 23]. Abnormal protein expression of LEF1 has been detected in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells and monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis, indicating that LEF1 plays an early role in B-cell development and CLL leukemogenesis [24]. Transplantation of LEF1-transduced bone marrow also developed acute myeloid leukemia and B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in mouse models [25]. Additionally, LEF1 contributes to the survival and proliferation of pro-B cells during early B cell development [26]. GWAS also identified the LEF1 gene as a susceptibility locus for systemic lupus erythematosus and CLL [27-29]. These previous results suggest that the dysfunction of the LEF1 gene is involved in early B lymphocyte development, which is involved in the pathogenesis of KD. In our study, we found that a nonsynonymous SNP (rs4365796: c.1106C＞T, p.Thr369Met) was significantly associated with KD in patients younger than 6 months of age. This SNP was predicted as probably damaging and deleterious by PolyPhen and SIFT, respectively, suggesting that this amino acidaltering variant can change the biological functions of LEF1 protein, probably during the early development of B cells.
Although we found that a nonsynonymous SNP (rs4365796: c.1106C＞T, p.Thr369Met) in the LEF1 gene is significantly associated with KD in Korean patients younger than 6 months of age, the biological role of the LEF1 variant is still unknown. Therefore, we should investigate how the amino acid-altering LEF1 variant specifically affects the immune response in infants and subsequently the potential mechanism of LEF1-mediated pathogenesis in KD. Additionally, the significantly associated SNP (rs4365796) in the LEF1 gene in Korean KD patients was not replicated in the Japanese samples, although the same direction of risk effect was detected (Table 1). As shown in Table 1, the risk allele of the LEF1 gene is a rare variant with lower allele frequency in the Japanese population (risk allele frequency = 0.023 in Korean vs. 0.018 in Japanese control samples). Furthermore, the portions of KD patients younger than 6 months of age was higher in Japan (9.19% in Japan vs. 7.13% in Korea) (Table 1), suggesting that Korean KD patients younger than 6 months of age are a genetically enriched and more homogeneous case population. A previous study also reported that the Japanese population has a higher incidence of KD in patients younger than 6 months of age compared to the Korean population (11.2% in Japanese KD patients vs. 7.7% in Korean KD patients) [30]. Therefore, we assume that no replication of the LEF1 gene in the Japanese samples may be due to the lower frequency of the risk allele in the LEF1 gene and/or higher KD incidence in those younger than 6 months of age compared to the Korean population. Conversely, another limitation of our study is the low statistical power due to the small sample size resulting from the selection of a rare variant with an allele frequency less than 2.5% and of age subgroups of KD patients, particularly younger than 6 months of age (less than 10% of total KD cases). Therefore, to support our findings, further replication studies are necessary in more independent sample sets with larger sample size.
In conclusion, we identified that a nonsynonymous SNP (rs4365796: c.1106C＞T, p.Thr369Met) in the LEF1 gene is significantly associated with KD in children younger than 6 months of age. This amino acid-altering variant in the LEF1 gene will be useful to identify high risk KD patients younger than 6 months of age because this SNP had a strong effect size (OR, 3.07). This result will provide new insight into the pathogenesis of the KD in infants.