Fatty acid synthase (FASN, E.C. 2.3.1.85) is a multi-enzyme complex that synthesizes endogenous fatty acids. Seven cycles of FASN-catalyzed reactions result in the conversion of acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA into 16-carbon palmitate [1, 2] by the successive addition of 2-carbon units per synthesis cycle. Acyl carrier protein (ACP) holds the growing chain covalently and transports it sequentially to the active sites of β-ketoacyl synthase (KS), acetyl transacylase, malonyl transacylase, β-hydroxy acyl dehydratase, enoyl reductase (ER), β-ketoacyl reductase (KR), and finally thioesterase (TE), from which palmitate is cleaved by catalytic actions.
Two major forms of FASN are known: FASN type I (FASNI) and type II. FASNI is a multimeric multi-enzyme complex involved in the synthesis of palmitate in an integrative manner on a single polypeptide chain (α) or on two different polypeptides (α and β). FASNI is further subdivided into two subtypes. Animal FASN, which is a homodimeric protein (α2), is arranged head to tail [3], and the microbial subgroup FASN, which is an oligomer of higher order, consists of certain bacterial FASN type I α6 hexamers and of fungal α6β6 dodecomers [4]. Type II FASN consists of independent proteins that catalyze individual reactions and is present in bacteria, plants, and eukaryotic mitochondria [5].
Besides the important biochemical role that FASN plays in lipid biogenesis, this complex enzyme has been implicated in several pathological conditions. In comparison with normal cells, the overexpression of FASN has been reported in several types of cancers, including prostrate, breast, ovarian, and colon cancers [6, 7, 8], which strongly suggests the involvement of FASN in cancer progression. Similarly, FASN overexpression in ocular cancer and retinoblastoma and its potential as an anti-cancer target using enzyme inhibitors have been reported from our lab [9]. FASN is also indicated to have a potential role in the clinical management of microbial infections, obesity, and diabetes. This enzyme is a potential target to control bacterial infections by using agents, such as cerulenin and triclosan [10], and an anti-tumor target against different cancers [11] and is also targeted for the treatment of obesity [12, 13] and diabetes [14, 15]. It is therefore important to understand the structure of this multi-enzyme protein in order to suitably target its various catalytic domains. The resulting ligands could be potential therapeutic leads.
In this study, we have attempted to predict the 3D structure of the enoyl reductase (ER) and KR domains of human FASN in unbound form by comparative modeling. At the time of this model development, the structurally closest template was the reported crystal structure of porcine FASN (PDB ID: 2VZ8, 3.2 Å). This mammalian FASN template revealed a complex architecture, covering five catalytic domains and also the inter-connecting linkers [16]. The crystal structures of some of the other individual domains of human FASN were available in ligand-bound forms-MAT (PDB ID: 2JFK), ACP (PDB ID: 2CG5), and TE (PDB ID: 2PX6, 3TJM) and in apo forms-KS (PDB ID: 3HHD) and MAT (PDB ID: 2JFD). Most recently, crystal structures of human FASN domains-ligand-bound ER (PDB ID: 4W9N) and apo ER (PDB ID: 4W82)-and KR (PDB ID: 4PIV) have been reported.
In order to validate the biological closeness of the predicted in silico model and also to infer the structure-function relationships, the predicted structures here were computationally docked with their respective physiological substrates. Further, these structures were also subjected to molecular dynamics (MD) simulation in apo and holo conditions to understand the conformational dynamics and stability.