Statistical analysis
For the calculation of the mean and SD of 14 craniofacial measurements, only individuals with age ≥ 20 were used to control growth effects. In addition, all genetic analyses for estimating familial correlation and heritability included all age groups.
To estimate the common latent variable in facial measurements, we implemented factor analysis using SAS version 9.1 (SAS Inc., Cary, NC, USA). The eigenvalues for 3 factors were greater than 1 (i.e., the cut-off of the eigenvalue), and the cumulative proportion was 79%. Orthogonal Varimax rotation and principal method were employed. The total number of factors used in this study was 3. The cut-off value of factor patterns was above 0.6 [22, 23]. Before estimating the genetic effects, we calculated 3 factor scores for each individual and evaluated the normal distribution of facial measurements, including factor scores, by Quantile-Quantile (Q-Q) plot and Kolmogorov-Smirnov's value. Most Q-Q plot lines were straight, and the measurements tended to follow a normal distribution (Kolmogorov-Smirnov's p > 0.05).
PEDINFO option in S.A.G.E. (2009; Statistical Analysis for Genetic Epidemiology, Release 6.0.1; http://darwin.cwru.edu/) was used to understand family information, such as offspring N and sibling N.
Because facial measurements depend on age, sex, and body mass index (BMI) of an individual, we used covariate variables, such as age, sex, age*sex, age2, age2*sex, and BMI. In this modeling, the significant covariate variables were adjusted by screen option of the Sequential Oligogenic Linkage Analysis Routines (SOLAR) package [24]. As a result, the residual variation, which is the remainder of the variation among phenotypes, excluding the portion pertaining to be important covariates, was obtained and applied to approximate the familial correlation and heritability.
We used the FCOR option in S.A.G.E. to estimate familial correlations. Familial correlations were calculated by a set of two random variables and arbitrary weights {wi} [25].
Narrow-sense heritability (h2) (proportion of phenotype variance attributable to additive genetic variance) was also estimated by maximum likelihood procedure using SOLAR. SOLAR employs a variance-components method, which has a long history in classical genetic study. Additionally, a bivariate model was used to test the genetic correlation between pairs of facial measurements within each factor. We estimated two parameters, based on maximum likelihood ratio method: additive genetic correlation (ρG) and environmental correlations (ρE).