Rationing and water recycling are an essential part of life at International Space Stations (ISSs) [1]. Water purification machines on the ISS partly mimic these processes, but they do not rely on microbes or any other living organisms. These machines cleanse wastewater in a 3-step process. The first step involves a filter that removes particles and debris. The water then passes through multifiltration beds that contain substances that remove organic and inorganic impurities. Finally, the catalytic oxidation reactor removes volatile organic compounds and kills bacteria and viruses. Once the water is purified, astronauts try to ensure that the water is used with maximum possible efficiency. Even with intense conservation and recycling efforts, the space station will gradually lose water because of inefficiencies in the life support system.
Water that passes through animals' bodies is refreshed by natural processes [2]. Microbes in the soil break down urea and convert it to a form that plants can absorb and use to build new plant tissue. Water excreted by animals also evaporates into the atmosphere and rains back down to the earth as freshwater-a natural form of distillation. ISSs always need to be resupplied with water, because no water reprocessing technology is currently available for use in space. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) scientists continue to look for ways to improve the life-support systems of space stations, which can thereby reduce water losses and aid in finding ways to reuse other waste products. Bacteria and viruses are extraordinarily abundant in water, soil, and sediment microbial ecosystems [3]. In drinking water, soil, and sediment, viral abundance exceeds that of co-existing host populations by 10- to 100-fold [4]. Microscopy and molecular genetic tools have been critical in demonstrating that bacteria and viruses are dynamic components of microbial ecosystems capable of significantly influencing the productivity and population biology of their host communities. Moreover, these approaches have begun to describe the immense genetic diversity of viral communities. A critical first step in the application of many cultivation-independent approaches to virus ecology is obtaining a viral concentrate from an environmental sample. Culture-dependent methods also rely on viruses being present at sufficiently high levels to be detected [3]. In this study, the methodology for the isolation and concentration of viruses from water, soil, and aquatic sediment samples has been discussed in detail.
Microorganisms constitute two-thirds of the earth's biological diversity [5, 6]. As many as 99% of the microbes present in certain environments can not be detected by regular techniques [7]. Protocols have been developed to assess unexplored microbial diversity in order to overcome the existing barriers that prevent the estimation of biodiversity [8]. New screening methods have been designed to construct specific fosmid libraries that can help distinguish novel microbial populations in drinking water samples [9]. To screen the complete populations, cloning vectors, like fosmids and bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), are being developed [10-12]. This article describes the various methodologies and tools that have been developed to understand and identify the widest spectrum of microbial communities, including bacteria, archaea, and viruses, through fosmid cloning analysis.
Bacteriophage phi29 (Φ29) DNA polymerase, the 66-kD product of viral gene 2, has been shown to be capable of efficient DNA amplification both in vitro and in vivo [13-15]. This enzyme is very reliable with respect to the amplification of genomic DNA for constructing libraries, especially when the starting genomic material is limited. This enzyme requires 2 proteins for its activity: viral DNA polymerase P2 and Φ29 terminal protein p3 [16]. The enzyme has high processivity (>70 kb) and a remarkable strand-displacement ability with single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA. Based on this enzymatic characteristic, the replication of both DNA strands can be processed from each terminal-priming event without the synthesis of RNA-primed Okazaki fragments. The enzyme also has a 3'-5' proofreading exonuclease function [17].
Bacteriophage ϕDNA polymerase amplifies circular DNA in a rolling-circle amplification (RCA) mechanism. This characteristic has been used to amplify and clone the complete circular DNA genome of bacteria and viruses. The amplified DNA could be used for direct sequencing and was cloned after digestion with a single cutting restriction endonuclease. The use of this enzyme simplified the cloning steps and increased the cloning efficiency of the complete genome of circular DNA viruses [18]. The Φ29 DNA polymerase was ideal for our project because of the limited amount of starting material available. In addition, the microbes in our sample could not be cultivated using traditional approaches. Using exonuclease-resistant random primers, Dean and colleagues have achieved up to a 10,000-fold amplification from 1 ng of M13 template and have also improved the average product length to greater than 40 kb [19]. The method is based on multiple displacement amplification technology and provides high yields of approximately 40 µg of DNA from only a few genome copies.
In a previous study on subsurface flow-constructed wetlands, PCR-based methods were developed and used for the detection of pathogenic microbial populations, such as Campylobacter spp. and Yersinia enterocolitica, in treated wastewater [20, 21]. In this study, we constructed fosmid libraries to assess the microbial diversity in drinking groundwater samples from Kennedy Space Center's ground service equipment tank and the space shuttle water tank (iodine-treated water) and examined the samples for the presence of many different bacterial populations during the water purification processes. The goals of this study were: 1) to compare the sensitivity of the fosmid cloning strategy with that of traditional culture-based and 16S rRNA-based approaches and 2) to detect the widest possible spectrum of microbial populations during the water purification process.