Network graph analysis
GMDR analysis step
GWAS datasets usually have enormous number of markers, which causes a severe computational burden. In order to deal with this computation problem, the single SNP association test with covariate adjustment is performed to all SNPs in a dataset. This step can be achieved via several toolkits that support regression analysis, such as PLINK. Filtering by specific criteria, such as p-value, is subsequently performed in order to reduce the number of SNPs.
With the selected SNPs from the single SNP association analysis, exhaustive two-way GMDR analysis is then applied. However, general toolkits supporting GMDR analysis can only handle hundreds of SNPs. Although the number of SNPs in this step can be reduced by giving more stringent criteria, it may ignore the SNPs having marginally less significant effects. In addition, a scheme to reduce overfitting, such as cross-validation, requires increased linear computation time. In order to solve this problem, faster toolkits are recommended, such as GPU-based GMDR analysis toolkits like cuGWAM [19].
Since the number of combinations in GMDR analysis is usually very large, all results of GMDR can not be stored. Thus, a criterion is needed to store the specific interactions satisfying the criterion, such as balanced accuracy (BA).
Network graph construction
Network graph is often used to visualize multiple sets of interactions. It consists of nodes and edges connecting two nodes. For simplicity of representation, we focus on two-way interactions. Since the two-way interaction is for the relationship between two variables, it can be easily represented as a graph that contains two nodes representing two variables of interaction and an edge corresponding to the interaction. According to this scheme, all interactions identified by GMDR analysis can be visualized in the network graph.
However, this scheme can cause too complex a graph structure when the number of interactions is large. Thus, it is recommended to select a certain number of possible interactions in the network graph to reduce the complexity of the network graph. Alternatively, the complexity of the network graph can be reduced by gene mapping information. Since many SNPs are placed in a gene or adjacent to a gene, it is possible to annotate multiple SNPs into a single node of a gene according to their position. However, this approach requires a delicate mapping process.
In addition, the network graph can represent the strength of the interaction by the thickness of the edge-that is, the higher the number of interactions between two nodes, the thicker the edge becomes.
Network graph analysis
It is important to derive a reasonable biological interpretation of identified GxG interactions. Here, we propose a network graph analysis step to aid the biological interpretation of the identified GxG interaction by using existing biological resources. In other words, the goal of this step is to find known biological evidence that supports the identified GxG interactions.
Resources used in this step consist of either a pair of a marker and target or two related markers, where a marker corresponds to a gene or SNP and a target represents a biologically proven target related with a marker. From a resource with marker and target information, such as HuGENet [21], miRBase [22], and is-rSNP [23], we simply assume that there is biological evidence if two SNPs within an interaction share the same biological target defined in the biological resource. For resources, such as COXPRESdb [24], having information about the correlation among genes, we assume that all correlated genes in these resources have biological interactions. Although this is a naïve assumption, the use of these resources is mainly to support the interactions identified by GMDR analysis. Note that many known biological resources have their own unique data structures that differ from each other. Consequently, the integration of multiple resources is recommended in order to provide further biological evidence for a given GxG interaction.