MS Data Analysis for Neuropeptide Identification
While neuropeptides can be identified by comparing experimental peptide masses obtained from MS data against a list of known neuropeptide masses, they are typically identified with both MS and MS/MS fragmentation data. While collision-induced dissociation is widely used for peptide identification, other fragmentation methods, such as higher energy collision dissociation and electron transfer dissociation, have recently improved the identification capability of peptides and PTM localization [414243]. The automated identification of neuropeptides based on their MS and MS/MS data is pursued by using proteomic-based search engines, such as Mascot, SEQUEST, X!Tandem, Peaks Studio, and ProSightPC [3744454647]. Since peptidomics searches typically employ criteria, such as no enzymatic cleavage and various common modifications (e.g., N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation), they often require a larger search space and longer search times for peptide identification. Several neuropeptide prohormone databases, including SwePep, have been constructed to facilitate neuropeptide identification, and cleavage prediction programs, such as NeuroPred, were developed to predict cleavage sites in prohormones and to provide the masses of the resulting peptides [4849]. In addition to the database search strategies, neuropeptides can be also identified by de novo sequencing, especially when the species of interest does not have a sequenced genome. While peptide spectra are compared with theoretical peptides in the database search strategy, de novo sequencing, which is the direct assignment of the amino acid sequence from the MS/MS spectrum, can be pursued when the database is not available. Although de novo sequencing can be performed manually, the process is labor-intensive and time-consuming. There are several software packages that can perform de novo sequencing directly on MS/MS data, including Lutefisk (http://www.hairyfatguy.com/lutefisk/), Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science), and PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions, http://www.bioinformaticssolutions.com/) [30]. The peptide sequences obtained from de novo sequencing are often compared with the nonredundant database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information to establish the peptide identities with the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST). The BLAST search compares a partial neuropeptide sequence against the database of a closely related species.