Modified Relative Codon Bias Strength (MRCBS)
The codon composition of genes fundamentally affects the protein translation. Our approach in estimating gene expression level is related to codon usage bias of a gene with respect to biased nucleotide composition at the three codon sites. Let fxyz be the observed normalized codon frequency for the codon triplet (x,y,z) in a particular reference set of gene and fn(m) is the relative observed frequency of base m at codon position n in the same reference set. Then, the RCB of a codon triplet (x,y,z) is defined as the ratio of observed frequency of a codon to the expected frequency under the hypothesis of random codon usage where the base compositions are biased at three sites as that in the reference set under study.
Thus the expression measure of MRCBS [2425] of a gene is defined as MRCBS=âˆi=1N(MRCBSxyz)1/N, where MRCBSxyz=RCBSxyzRCBSaa,max,RCBSxyz=fxyzf1(x)f2(y)f3(z), RCBSaa,max is the maximum RCBS of codon encoding same amino acid aa in the same reference set, and N is the length in codons of the query sequence. MRCBSxyz is independent of the size of the reference set as it is the ratio of the RCBS of the codon xyz to the maximum of RCBS of codon encoding same amino acid. The value of MRCBS lies between 0 and 1.
In this study, the criteria MRCBS > T (threshold score) was taken as a benchmark for identifying the highly expressed genes and methodology used to calculate threshold score as described in Sahoo and Das [25]. Due to evolving codon assignments as well as codon usage patterns as the adaptive response of genomes, threshold score for identifying highly expressed genes varies from genome to genome. For calculating threshold score (T), we defined a parameterization set to evaluate how well CAI value correlates actual expression level predicted by MRCBS. First, we calculated the CAI of the all genes by taking all RP (> 80 aa) genes as predicted highly expressed genes (PHE) genes and called this as an evaluation set. Then taking an arbitrary threshold score T of MRCBS we differentiated highly expressed genes from lowly expressed genes. The highly expressed genes with expression level (MRCBS) greater than T define parameterization set. We calculated the CAI parameters taking parameterization set as reference set. With the parameters in hand, CAI values for all the genes in the data set were computed. In order to evaluate how well the MRCBS predicts expression level, we measured the correlation between CAI values of the data set and evaluation set as merit of the method. We iterated the procedure by changing the expression level threshold T and repeating the subsequent steps until we arrived at an optimal merit of the method. Thus, we obtained the optimal threshold value of MRCBS of the whole genome expression data.
In this work, the expression level predictors CAI, RCA, and MRCBS have been computed by comparing its codon usage bias with the profile of universally functional genes, such as the RP genes, which are commonly referred as a reference set. The PHE are then characterized on the basis of the strength of the codon usage bias derived from the algorithms as described above and a gene is identified as PHE gene provided its MRCBS exceeds threshold value. To this end, we computed Pearson r correlation coefficients between different codon usage bias indices.