Epigenetic changes by environmental conditions enhance cellular plasticity [4]. Genomic DNA is packed into chromatin with histone protein and the changes of chromatin structure participate in the cellular processes in response to physiological signals. Chromatin structure is determined by epigenetic modification resulting in transcription and replication types of machinery and therefore influences biological consequences [5]. Epigenetic changes produce DNA, histone and chromatin modifications including methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, sumoylation, and ubiquitination with modifying enzymes (e.g., methyltransferases) [6]. Non-coding RNA is an epigenetic mark that mediates epigenetic modification by environmental factors such as diet. Modification of chromatin architecture by epigenetic marks can be heritable and modify the risks of disease in later life (Table 1) [7-17].
Several metabolites or cofactors of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycles involved in methylation or demethylation of histone [18]. The epigenetic modifying enzymes use some energy metabolites in one-carbon metabolism with S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM) and TCA cycles. SAM is generated through one-carbon metabolism and a key factor for epigenetic processes. DNA methylation requires the SAM as a methyl donor, while ten-eleven translocation and Jumonji C domain-containing proteins-mediated demethylation requires TCA cycle metabolite α-ketoglutarate and Fe2+ as a cofactor. DNA and histone demethylation have the potential to regulate diverse physiological functions, including metabolic signaling [19].
There are several known dietary methyl donors including folate, choline, and vitamin B12 participate in one-carbon metabolism and these nutrients have been examined for the epigenetic regulation in animal and human studies [2]. Methyl donors are related to energy production and amino acid metabolism, therefore nutritional imbalance as the disruption of the one-carbon cycle may participate in the development of metabolic diseases. Besides, many studies have shown that the mechanism of developmental reprogramming is involved in dietary availability of methyl donors [2].
Histone (de)methylation is one of the mechanisms involved in several diseases including metabolic syndrome and cancer [20]. Lysine methylation of a specific site of H3 acts both transcriptional activation (H3K4) and silencing (H3K9, H3K27) for regulating gene expression by a degree of methylation within the histone tail. The H3K9 specific demethylase JmjC domain-containing histone demethylase 2A (JHDM2A) was well known to an important regulator of fatty acid metabolism, therefore loss of function of JHDM2A resulted in obesity and hyperlipidemia [21,22]. H3K4 demethylase LSD1 using flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) as a cofactor, epigenetically represses energy expenditure, which facilitates energy storage as triglycerides in white adipocytes [23]. FAD is also related to the TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and fatty acid β-oxidation with riboflavin (vitamin B2) in the cytoplasm and mitochondria [24].
Arginine methylation of histone has been rapidly highlighted over the years for the role of diseases [9]. Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) with SAM as a methyl donor, transfer of methyl groups to specific arginine residues in histone and nonhistone protein substrates, resulting in the byproduct S-adenosyl-homocysteine (SAH). The SAM/SAH ratio can reflect the cellular methylation potential, which interacted with PRMTs. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1α (PGC-1α; encoded by the PPARGC1A) serves as a transcriptional coactivator in mitochondria and has a function in oxidative metabolism. PRMT1 mediated cytosine methylation in PGC-1α which is expressed in brown adipose tissue involved in energy metabolism and diabetes [25].
Acetylation of histone H3 and H4 is mediated by acetyl-CoA and NAD+ for cellular metabolism. Lysine acetylation occurs in proteins involved in glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism and the TCA cycle [26]. Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), a deacetylase depending on NAD+ has emerged as a key metabolic sensor linking to metabolic homeostasis, and SIRT1 participates the regulation of glucose homeostasis under nutrient deficiency [27]. For example, SIRT1 modulates acetylation on H3K9/K14 at circadian clock-controlled gene promoters through a high-fat diet [28]. It is reported that acetyl-CoA dependent histone acetylation may have an important role in the cellular assessment of metabolic states and circadian clock [29]. Therefore, nutrients (e.g., pyruvate, fatty acids, or branched-chain amino acids) involved in acetyl-Co A levels can modulate metabolic signaling.
Nutrients driven O-GlcNAc (N-acetylglucosamine) glycosylation has emerged as an important chromatin modification process [30,31]. O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is a key enzyme through protein glycosylation in the Hexosamone Biosynthetic Pathway. Several studies reported that nutrients-sensing GlcNAcylation of histone proteins has involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of biological processes [32]. Chromatin GlcNAcylation depend on the cellular processes with glucose, glutamine, fatty acid and ATP metabolism. High fat diet induced insulin resistance, hyperphagia and obesity through O-GlcNAc cycling [33,34]; thus, OGT can be a sensor for adipose to brain axis to target obesity [34].