In this study, we proposed a workflow of matched normal AML exome sequencing analysis and the framework for defining sample subgroups. We observed every sample having a nonsynonymous mutation associated with hematological and lymphoid malignancy genes, but the candidate oncogenes showed diverse characters.
We selected 45 genes that had 3 or more nonsynonymous mutations and performed hierarchical clustering analysis of the samples by these genes. In classic hierarchical clustering analysis by Ward's method, we could not identify the genetic relationship of those clusters. On the other hand, the result of concept lattice analysis gave us insight into the mutational pattern of each sample.
In subgroup 1, samples 3, 4, and 7 shared SYNE1 gene mutations. SYNE1 gene encodes a spectrin repeat-containing protein expressed in skeletal and smooth muscle and peripheral blood lymphocytes that localizes to the nuclear membrane [21]. This gene is not a well-known leukemic gene but is observed in some hematological malignancies and other cancer types [22]. In glioblastoma, SYNE1 mutation is significantly correlated with the overexpression of several known glioblastoma survival genes [23]. In the case of sample 3, the ITGAX gene, encoding ankyrin repeat domain 18A, was mutated. This gene is well known by the association with leukemia [24] and lung cancer [25]. For sample 4, the possible oncogene is LAMC3. LAMC3 gene encodes laminins, which are the major non-collagenous constituent of basement membrane. LAMC3 mutations are associated with several cancers, including colon cancer, lung cancer, and melanoma, and candidate tumor suppressor genes in bladder transitional cell carcinoma [26]. LAMC3 is involved in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.Akt signaling pathway, since it has a role in cell adhesion. The ANKRD18A gene is the oncogene candidate for sample 7 and is a novel epigenetic regulation gene in lung cancer [25]. Therefore, it is possible that the pair relationship of those genes (ITGAX-SYNE1, LAMC3- SYNE1, and ANKRD18A-SYNE1) could contribute together to evolve the leukemic cell transformation.
The major limitation of our study is that we could not validate the mutation results by Sanger method or deep sequencing. We selected highly mutated genes having 3 mutations or more, but this definition is arbitrary, so we might have lost candidate oncogenes in some patients.
In this study, we suggest the concept of clustering samples that have diverse mutated genes. AML is very heterogeneous genetic disease. Despite the small number of samples we have studied, the genetic variation patterns were not common for all samples. It could have been better to evaluate more sample data for analysis by clustering analysis.