Bacterial TSSs have been identified mainly through primer extension and S1 nuclease protection mapping assay, but these methods are labor-intensive (Fig. 2A) [37]. High-density tiling arrays have also been used for large-scale TSS mapping in E. coli and Caulobacter crescentus, with limited mapping resolution [15, 38]. In addition, indirect TSS identification in the E. coli transcriptome has been made by RNAP chromatin immunoprecipitation, coupled with microarray (ChIP-chip) [39]. More recently, dRNA-seq has been developed to map TSSs in Helicobacter pylori [9]. It revealed 1907 TSSs, which were found in upstream regions of annotated mRNAs within annotated genes on the same DNA strand or on the opposite DNA strand and in regions without any annotated genes in proximity. In addition to the 337 primary operons defined by the TSSs, it obtained 126 additional suboperons and 66 monocistrons overlapping the 3' part of polycistrons in H. pylori. Alternative TSSs for the determination of suboperons (or transcription units) have been determined through the integration of massive-scale sequencing and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends (5'-RACE) method in E. coli (Fig. 2B) [10]. The consecutive iterations of experiments identified a total of 4,133 TSSs. Interestingly, it was found that ~35% of promoters contained multiple TSSs, defining alternative transcription units in the E. coli genome. For example, the transcription factor Lrp activates stpA, encoding an H-NS-like DNA-binding protein from a dominant TSS position (2,796,558). However, two other TSSs are used less in the exponential growth phase. These results show that the bacterial transcriptome is actively regulated by means of alternative TSSs in response to differential environmental conditions. dRNA-seq method has been applied to detect genomewide TSS maps in other bacterial species. Interestingly, the cyanobacterium Synechocystis contains 3,537 TSSs, 64% of which were assigned to asRNAs or ncRNAs [40]. In conclusion, the dRNA-seq approach is a strong tool for annotation of operon structures, transcription units (or suboperons), and detection of TSSs, providing important insights into the understanding of a comprehensive transcription regulatory network.