LAPPS Grid ↔ INCEpTION
INCEpTION integrates interactive annotation support for users to speed up annotating and improve the annotation quality. One kind of support is implemented in form of so-called recommenders. A recommender is a machine learning algorithm that provides annotators with suggestions for potential annotations. Suggestions are shown next to the annotations, and they can be accepted or rejected. From this, recommenders can (if the algorithm supports it) learn and improve the quality of the suggestions, thus implementing a cycle of manual and machine correction (“human-in-the-loop”). Currently, INCEpTION ships with several different recommenders and allows developers to add their own. Given that the LAPPS Grid provides a wide range of different NLP tools as services, we have implemented a recommender that calls services available from the LAPPS Grid. Because INCEpTION allows users to create their own annotation layers and features, we need to ensure that recommenders called from the LAPPS Grid can only be configured for layers whose types are compatible. For this, we leverage the metadata information given by the LAPPS Grid service API to prune recommenders that are not compatible.
Note that while INCEpTION can use LAPPS Grid services to generate annotation suggestions for the human to correct, but there is currently no way of feeding the corrections directly back to the services for re-training. However, we intend to configure another trainable recommender within INCEpTION, which learns based on the suggestions from the LAPPS Grid services that the user has explicitly accepted or corrected.
INCEpTION internally uses UIMA CAS as a syntactic format, whereas the LAPPS Grid uses its LIF (JSON-LD) format. When recommending, we therefore use the DKPro Core CAS ↔ LIF converter, which was developed in the recent past to enable incorporation of DKPro Core modules into the LAPPS Grid (and vice versa). The basic type system of DKPro Core and the LAPPS Grid (tokens, sentences, POS, and NER) corresponds one-to-one, allowing a simple conversion.