Epigenome is the word describing the thing that is not included in genetics. "Epi" means upon or outside; so, a direct translation is "the thing that is not related with genetics or above genetics." Practically, it means gene regulation phenomena, including by means of DNA methylation, histone modification, and miRNA. To explore epigenomic regulation, International Human Epigenome Consortium (IHEC) was initiated to profile the epigenome of all human cell types. To understand the current IHEC, it is required to turn back into the initial steps for fostering this consortium. It has passed more than a decade after completion of the human genome project, and several efforts were conceived to accelerate finding disease-causing genetic variations, such as genome-wide association study (2003), Encyclopedia of DNA Element (ENCODE, 2003), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, 2006), International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC, 2008), and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Roadmap Epigenomics (2008) (Table 1). IHEC was born with ground making effort of these several international consortiums. Although the Human Genome Project, which defined the exact sequence of 3 billion bases in DNA, is one of the big milestones in genome research, cataloging DNA sequence information has a limited effect on defining whole varieties of genome variations that are expected to be crucial cause of disease. Also, the sequence itself does not provide how the genome is packaged in chromosomes and chromatin, which is essential for organismal development and differentiation. So, epigenetic regulation, in addition to transcription factor binding profile, is emerging as a powerful tool to identify disease correlation with genome information [1]. In 2004, a National Cancer Institute (NCI)-sponsored workshop, Epigenetic Mechanisms in Cancer, had initiating discussions of necessity of the Human Epigenome Project, which will be in parallel with the Human Genome Project. In 2005, there was a special workshop on the BLUEPRINT for a Human Epigenome Project, the American Association of Cancer Research (AACR) Human Epigenome Workshop, on defining human epigenomes at high resolution.
The consensus of workshop participants was that there were compelling reasons from both scientific and public health perspectives to initiate a human epigenome project that could take full advantage of advances in several existing US and European initiatives. In 2006, TCGA began as a 3-year pilot with an investment of $50 million each from the NCI and National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) to analyze the genome and epigenome of 20 types of cancer tissue. In 2008, amending the TCGA, international efforts were assembled to analyze cancer genome/epigenome variation. As a result, the ICGC was launched in 2008 to coordinate large-scale cancer (epi)genome studies in tumors from 50 cancer types and/or subtypes, with participation of 15 countries. ICGC is focused on obtaining a comprehensive description of genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic changes in 50 different tumor types. Also, the international Alliance for Human Epigenetics and Disease (AHEAD) [2] was conceived among participating countries. As a result, the Roadmap Epigenomics Program was fostered as AHEAD's suggestion. Finally the NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Program was initiated with the funding of $200 million for 5 years from NIH [3]. Roadmap Epigenomics aimed to produce reference epigenome data from a variety of human cells. As NIH and European epigenome mapping activity was commenced as a locally scattered project, there were efforts to assemble reference epigenome mapping as an international collaboration. From 2009, several workshops were held in NIH or Europe, and finally at the 2010 Washington meeting, IHEC was officially born.