According to the molecular evolutionary theory, mutations occurring in coding regions involved in amino acid changes, called nonsynonymous mutations, are basically harmful and deleterious to organisms and are subject to strong purifying selection [1]. Changes in amino acids in protein sequences by any type of mutation—particularly, changes from original or ancestral amino acids into new amino acids with very different physicochemical properties—can cause severe problems in protein structure and function [2]. In contrast, mutations in coding regions but not related to amino acid changes are called synonymous mutations and are generally considered to be functionally neutral [3–5]. In fact, most recent research on identifying disease-causing variants in genetic diseases, including Mendelian diseases and common complex diseases, such as diabetes and cancers, has been focusing on searching for nonsynonymous variants [6–12]. In most of these studies, synonymous variants have been ignored and even filtered out for further functional validation processes. Another difficulty in studying synonymous variants is that there are no good or established tests for functional synonymous codons.
One clue suggesting the non-neutrality of synonymous codons could be drawn from the study on synonymous codon usage bias (SCUB) [13–15]. SCUB means that the uses of synonymous codons involved in encoding the same amino acids are not equivalent to each other, depending on the kinds of proteins or the species carrying those proteins. In other words, different proteins in different species have different synonymous codon preferences when determining amino acids [15, 16]. No such biased codon preference among different synonymous codons is expected under the assumption of the neutrality of synonymous codons. Researchers have been recognizing this intriguing phenomenon for a long time and trying to figure out what factors lead to SCUB [17].
Two different explanations have been provided so far about what causes the SCUB phenomenon. One is based on uneven nucleotide compositions throughout genomes [18]. Simply, the research groups supporting the idea of biased nucleotide compositions think that genes located in genomic regions with abundant G or C content tend to prefer codons with G- or C-endings [19]. Consistently, it has been observed that there is a correspondence of G/C content between introns and exons in mammals, which means that genes harboring introns with higher G/C content are likely to carry exons with higher G/C content. The second scenario posits that SCUB is basically a consequence of natural selection of the roles of synonymous codons in the regulation of the expression of genes [20–22]. The research groups supporting the second scenario insist that genes with higher levels of expression are expected to have higher evolutionary constraints on the requirement of codons necessary for improving translational efficiency and accuracy than genes with lower levels of expression [23, 24]. In fact, numerous studies have shown that the codon usage of highly expressed genes is biased toward optimal codons than lowly expressed genes and that this biased usage is linked to the enhancement of translational speed and accuracy [25, 26]. In relation, the amounts of cognate tRNAs carrying anticodons are higher against optimal codons than against non-optimal codons.
An evolutionary explanation of SCUB, based on natural selection, was investigated under a hypothesis, called Hill-Robertson (HR) interference. The HR hypothesis posits that the efficiency of natural selection of one site will weaken when the site is linked to adjacent sites and does not segregate independently, wherein recombination can play a role in relieving the interference. There is some agreement among researchers that SCUB is positively correlated with recombination rates, although there are opposite observations on the effect of HR [27–29].
In the present work, we thus decided to summarize other facets of the functions that synonymous codons might have, other than the functions that are related to translational efficiency and accuracy in the regulation of gene expression (Fig. 1).