The visual analytics model
Our visual analytics model reflects the importance of the domain knowledge in the visual analytics process (see Fig. 1). Earlier, we mentioned the importance of validating a method by the outcomes in the discipline that the method is used. To do this, visual analytics must adapt to the respective discipline and conform to the language and norms expected of that discipline. For example, the expression of identified significant genes is required to be validated by the domain experts when the analysis is undertaken in independent laboratories.
An appropriate visualization helps the analyst to gain an understanding of the data and construct knowledge through our powerful human visual perception and reasoning capabilities. We provide three interactive views for patient-to-patient comparison, including 1) overviews of the entire patient population in the similarity space, 2) detailed views of selected patients, and 3) GOI. We describe these visualizations in the following sections. Domain analysts should be able to interact and explore through different views to make further discovery of, and insights into, the data. They can obtain a better understanding of the data and their structures and contribute their domain expertise to the knowledge discovery process. From the discovery of new knowledge, the analyst can evaluate, refine, go beyond, and ultimately confirm hypotheses built from previous iterations and automated analysis. The challenge presented to the construction of appropriate visualization is to cover the range of visualizing all of the data but making only all of the relevant data available to the analyst when it is relevant to do so.
The presented work was developed with strong involvement from cancer researchers at the Children's Hospital in Westmead, Sydney, Australia, who are experts in ALL research. The philosophy behind the work is that with this new way of looking at genetic and clinical details from the perspectives of both domain knowledge and technologies, visual analytics can provide a medium for the discovery of genetic and clinical problems, potentially leading to improved ALL treatment strategies.