A total of 515 Alu-mediated deletion events have been identified in the human genome. The deletion events occurred either through Alu insertion-mediated deletions (AIMD) or Alu recombination-mediated deletions (ARMD): 24 AIMDs and 492 ARMDs. AIMDs and ARMDs have deleted 11,206 and 396,420 base pairs of the human genome, respectively, after the divergence of the human and chimpanzee lineages (~6 mya) [14323334]. Alu element has been frequently involved in the genomic recombination because of its two characteristics: a high level of sequence identity among them and its abundance in the human genome. Among the 492 ARMD events, 197 ARMD events were occurred by the recombination between Alu elements belonging to different subfamilies. Although AluJ subfamily is more abundant than AluY subfamily in the human genome, AluY subfamily is more associated with ARMD events because AluY subfamily retains a higher sequence identity among its members than AluJ subfamily does. Alu element accumulates random mutations over time so that older Alu elements have more mutations than younger elements [33].
DNA DSB is one of the most dangerous events of DNA damage. In the human genome, it could be repaired by retrotransposons using two different mechanisms: nonhomologous end-joining mediated deletion (NHEJ) and HR [34]. NHEJ does not need a homologous template for repair of DSBs while HR requires sequence homologies on either side of the break for the repair (Fig. 4A). DSB repair by NHEJ mechanism is initiated by an enzyme complex including Ku70/80 heterodimer. After the enzyme complex binds to either side of DSB, it functions as a docking site for other NHEJ enzymes such as DNA ligase [3536]. Nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) is one of HRs. It occurs between two DNA sequences which are not alleles but share a high sequence similarity from one another. Major NAHR hotspots for several human diseases locate at repeat elements including Alu element. During meiosis, Alu elements can misalign and the subsequent crossover could lead to genetic rearrangements of duplication, deletion, and translocation [3738]. NAHR is proceeded either by interchromosomal recombination, in which occurs between different chromosomes or intrachromosomal recombination, in which recombination occurs via crossing over within the same chromosome. Interchromosomal recombination results in a deletion or duplication depending the orientation of the DNA sequences. Intrachromosomal recombination results in a deletion or inversion (Fig. 4B).