The US FDA's action evoked mixed reactions. Some expressed their concerns, saying that the FDA is overcautious and paternalistic and hinders medical advances. According to Green and Farahany [3], the FDA's action violates the rights of individuals to receive information and of 'commercial speech' and undermines the democratization of health care and patient empowerment. Also, they were concerned that this kind of overcautious regulation might stifle the consumer genomics field itself and insisted that the agency should not restrict DTC genomic testing without empirical evidence of harm. However, rather ironically, they ended up emphasizing the PGS's poor clinical utility by saying that health-related interpretations of the PGS, particularly about common genetic variants, relate only indirectly to preventing or diagnosing disease [4]. If their comment is true, what is the point of taking the test? It is simply not ethical to entice people to pay for useless products. One non-profit technology policy think tank, called TechFreedom, launched an online petition asking the FDA to reverse the ban and collected a total of 10,073 signatures on January 18, 2014 [15]. Many petitioners said that their genetic codes belong to them, so they have the "right to know" what is written there, and that the assumption that they should be "protected from knowing" because they are not smart enough to understand is simply insulting. All of these concerns are understandable, but we insist that genetic testing with scientific flaws itself is a great harm to consumers and that those flaws need to be addressed before discussing the protection of anyone's right to know or not to know.
Of course, there are many people who support the FDA's action as protection of consumers from potentially invalid and almost useless information. Among the professional proponents, Baudhuin emphatically wrote in her opinion paper that if it is too burdensome to prove the validity of the information that the DTC testing companies offer, they should not sell the information in the first place [2]. Some consumers are already initiating procedures for class-action lawsuits against 23andMe, claiming that it is selling misleading information [2]. On November 27, 2013, just 5 days after the FDA's warning letter was sent to 23andMe, the first class-action lawsuit was already filed in the Southern District Court of California [16]. However, even among the supporters, some people saw the FDA's action as rather unusual, because the decision was largely based on its theoretical harm rather than actual harm, which the FDA has usually been waiting for before acting.
In Korea, Lee and Lee [4] of the KHIDI submitted a report in June 2014 to the PPJRAI, titled "Market Analysis and Strategies for Regulatory Reform in Medical Industry," which expressed a stance somehow different from that of the US FDA [4]. In this report, they suggested that it will help to expand the PGS market if genetic testing agencies are exempted from providing at least two scientific reports to support or prove the clinical validity of their tests when they make a notification of their testing items for disease prevention to the Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention [4]. This recommendation seems to be in opposition to the US FDA's. Also, they recommended an amendment to the Bioethics and Safety Act, which will allow non-medical institutions, such as biotechnology companies, to perform health-related PGSs, at least for disease prediction and prevention (not diagnosis) [4]. However, they added that this predictive, preventive genetic testing should be performed under the supervision of physicians, like the US FDA insists. Since these recommendations are supposed be delivered to the ministries involved in regulating genetic testing, we may guess which direction our governmental regulation system will take in the near future.
23andMe is now working to get FDA approval for its health tests; the company submitted seven health-related tests to the FDA for review in July 2014; it plans to submit 100 additional tests before the end of the year [17]. However, it is very likely that this process will take years. However, they have been trying different strategies, including finding new markets. From October 2014, 23andMe has begun selling its health-related genetic tests in Canada, despite still being blocked by the US FDA from offering its health risk-related service [18].