In mammals, a small subset of autosomal genes are functionally different between two alleles due to an epigenetic mechanism, termed genomic imprinting [1, 2]. The number of imprinted genes is estimated to be 100-200 per mammalian genome. These genes are usually clustered in specific chromosomal regions; thus, several genes from a given genomic interval are imprinted together as a group. Each imprinted domain, harboring 5 to 10 members, spans a relatively large genomic interval, ranging from a few hundred kilobases to megabases in length [3]. The genomic structure of a given domain, such as gene content, order, and distance, is well conserved between different mammalian lineages. The evolutionary constraint maintaining this domain structure is likely related to the fact that the imprinted genes within one domain are usually co-regulated through shared cis regulatory elements. These regulatory regions are termed imprinting control regions (ICRs) [4]. Several ICRs have been identified from individual domains by a series of human and mouse genetic studies in the past 20 years. Genetic and molecular studies investigating these ICRs, particularly the ICR of the H19/Igf2 domain, have been very insightful with regard to our understanding of epigenetics, as well as long-distance transcriptional control mechanisms in humans and mice [2].
Paternally expressed gene 3 (Peg3) is one of the imprinted genes that were discovered 20 years ago through subtractive pooling schemes of mRNA between paternal and maternal disomic embryos [5]. An independent study also discovered Peg3 as an important gene for muscle development; it was thus named Pw1 [6]. Shortly after these simultaneous discoveries of mouse Peg3, the human homolog was also identified as one of the zinc finger genes located in human chromosome 19q13.4 [7]. Since then, six additional imprinted genes have been identified from the 500-kb genomic interval surrounding the Peg3 locus, confirming the presence of an imprinted domain in the human and mouse genomes; it was thus named the Peg3 imprinted domain. A series of follow-up investigations have been conducted to characterize the genomic structures and regulatory mechanisms, as well as the functions of individual genes located within the Peg3 imprinted domain. In this short review, we intend to 1) summarize the information that we have learned so far regarding the Peg3 domain and 2) discuss the similarities and differences between the Peg3 domain and other imprinted domains.