Cancer is a complex disease with heterogeneous clinical behaviors developed by accumulation of multiple genetic or epigenetic alterations. Several global research consortia have made great efforts to improve the understanding of cancer biology and the development of more effective cancer treatments [12]. Most treatment options for Korean cancer patients were established based on such western population investigations. However, there are clear molecular differences showing different treatment effectiveness between Korean and non-Korean cancer patients [34]. Thus, it is very important to identify distinct molecular characteristics of Korean cancer patients.
Currently, numerous databases and analysis toolkits supporting cancer genomics studies have been reported [5678910]. These studies mostly support a database system for searching disease-associated genes or target drugs. Although many researchers have tried to develop platforms to find molecular markers from genomics data, there are few suitable web-based resources that help researchers develop gene signatures associated with Korean cancer patients. Collecting Korean cancer genomics data, comparing with other data obtained from non-Korean and estimating prognostic or predictive value of the genes or gene sets using proper statistical analyses may be a daunting task for many investigators, particularly clinicians and oncologists.
Here, we introduce a web-based initial repository, namely Korean Cancer Genome Database (KCGD), to help investigators in the efforts for searching prognostic signatures in Korean cancer patients. The database contains the gene expression profile with clinical data obtained from more than 1,000 Korean cancer patients. It is designed to be simple to search significant molecules, for which it is available for instant statistical survival analyses. In addition, our database has gradually containing non-Korean datasets so that users can easily compare or validate newly identified molecules independently.