Recent developments in NGS methods and accompanying bioinformatics tools have paved the way for ongoing genomics research widely used in the agricultural biotechnology field. Consequently, several studies reported new approaches in GM crop safety assessment using NGS platforms [101112]. In our study, we investigated EGF inserted GM rice events using NGS technology and bioinformatics to test the potential uses of this new approach in molecular assessment of transgenic organisms.
Results were successful in differentiating NGS read types using in silico analyses from GM rice, PJKS131-2 and hypothetically, the outcome was acceptable in terms of read classification. However, as a validation step, we experienced unexpected problems. Consistent with mapping and aligning data, we considered all possible transgenic insertion directions on the rice chromosomes and designed PCR primers based on loci information. Among the primers, except for locus specific primers on chromosome 4, results showed all matches were mismatches, which was caused by computational errors derived from analogous sequences between the rice genome and the transgenic vector. Therefore, we concluded it is essential to develop more accurate algorithms based on the transformation vector.
In addition, it is important to note our experimental sample was collected from rice callus tissues, with Agrobacterium co-incubation and a plant cell suspension culture system. Transgenic plant cell suspension culture system exhibits several advantages, including a low microorganism risk and chemical contamination, simple cell culture methods, economical facilities, and stable productivity. However, it is difficult to obtain pure genomic DNA of the host plant without plasmid DNA mixing using the plant cell culture method. We eliminated NGS raw reads mapped only against vector DNA (type C), however if raw reads contained too many vector backbone sequences, problems in further bioinformatics analyses would still occur. Further studies are required with appropriate controls of GM plants in cell culture environments.
In the present study, we completed a proof-of-concept experiment to examine the molecular characterization of a recombinant-protein produced GM rice event using NGS methods. New approaches have recently been reported to assess the development and release of GM crops, however these techniques are not popularized in the field of GM risk assessment. However, previous studies in other disciplines have successfully established NGS, but for practical reasons, it has not been easy to apply this new method for testing GMOs. NGS strategies largely depend on sample quality, amount of data, and subsequent bioinformatics analyses. Therefore, it is critical proper guidelines to discovery transgenic site by NGS data matched and PCR test in the GMOs established and required.