Non-LTR retrotransposon
Human non-LTR retroposons include both active (L1, Alu, and SVA) and inactive elements (L2 and mammalian-wide interspersed repeat). Although more than 500,000 copies of L1 elements are found in the human genome, only 100 copies are known to be intact [29]. An intact L1 element is approximately 6 kilobases (kb) in length, with a 5' untranslated region (UTR) containing an internal RNA polymerase II promoter, two open reading frames (ORF1 and ORF2), and a 3' UTR (Fig. 1) [29, 30]. L1 elements are the only autonomous TEs in the human genome because of their retrotransposition property, called target-primed reverse transcription [27]. Alu elements are often called "a parasite's parasite," because they do not code for a polymerase and, hence, are non-autonomous in nature. Alu elements depend on L1 elements for retrotransposition machinery [31, 32, 33]. However, they are considered the most successful TEs in the human genome in terms of copy number [27]. An intact SVA element is approximately 2 kb in length, which includes a hexamer repeat, an Alu-like region, a variable number of tandem repeats, and a HERV-K10-like sequence. SVA elements are also non-autonomous and most likely depend on L1 retrotransposition machinery [34, 35].
Two key features of non-LTR retrotransposons that control retrotransposition activity are high copy number and continued activity over millions of years [5, 27]. From an evolutionary perspective, the observed uniqueness of non-LTR retrotransposons is due to their vertical transfer in both primates and mammals [4, 5, 36]. Amplification rates among non-LTR retrotransposons are not uniform (Alu, 40 Mya; L1, 12-40 Mya; SVA, 6 Mya) [27]. Among non-LTR retrotransposons, Alu elements are the most thoroughly studied in relation to evolution. Alu repeats may cause genomic diversity in various ways. Their amplification has enabled them to become the largest family of mobile elements in the human genome. It is estimated that thousands of Alu elements have integrated into the human genome since the divergence of humans and African apes [37, 38, 39, 40]. Although some Alu insertions have caused harmful mutations, most have contributed to genetic diversity [8]. Moreover, Alu repeats have also influenced the accumulation of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the genome [30, 40, 41]. From previous reports, it is evident that most of the recent Alu insertions are the source of genetic variations, which have been useful for studying both the relationships between populations and the evolution and organization of tandem-arrayed gene families [37, 38, 39, 40]. Batzer and Deninger [42] suggested that the Alu insertion, in relation to genetic variation, may also be useful in generating species-specific genetic markers.