Human accelerated conserved noncoding sequences (HACNSs)
HACNSs are sequences in the human genome that were conserved throughout vertebrate history but changed significantly after the divergence of humans and chimps. Human genomes have a number of such sequences that obtained surprisingly more mutations after the emergence of humans than before. These regions are typically rich in cis-regulatory transcriptional enhancers that render specific expression pattern of genes involved during development [75-77]. Identification of these cis-regulatory elements in human or other large genomes is done mostly by cross-species sequence comparison, primarily because the functional cis-regulatory elements are generally unique to the genome, which makes paralogy-based identification of such sequences nearly impossible [78]. Since it has long been proposed that phenotypic variation between humans and chimps is mostly brought about by regulatory elements than coding sequences [79], it would be particularly interesting to make an elaborated comparison between differences in conserved regions in modern humans and Neanderthals. Such a comparison between the human genome and initial Neanderthal draft genome sequence [27], involving a total of 2,613 human accelerated regions, revealed that the Neanderthal sequence carried 3,259 human-specific changes in these regions. The comparison revealed that 51 positions in 45 regions were different between these two species; Neanderthals carried the ancestral form while all modern humans carry the human-specific variant. In a recent study, it has been found that the Neanderthal genome retains the ancestral state of a polymorphic site in a conserved noncoding microRNA, which is involved in regulating two genes that are important for teeth formation [80]. This may explain the dental differences between modern humans and Neanderthals. These findings are interesting enough to initiate further studies to analyze the probable impact of the variations in conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs) that exist between these two species. Furthermore, previously in three different studies, the number of HACNSs was found to be between 202 and 1175 [10, 11, 15]. All these studies used different methods to identify CNSs and included more species during the comparison. Their data can also be included in the future for the comparison of CNSs between modern humans and Neanderthals. The most rapidly evolving HACNS identified so far, named HACNS1, has accumulated 16 human-specific changes out of its 546 bases since the divergence of humans and chimps [12]. HACNS1 functions in multiple structures early in the developing stages of the mouse embryo as a transcriptional enhancer, including the developing anterior limb [12]. But, this function is missing for the orthologous enhancers in chimpanzee and rhesus, suggesting that HACNS1 has a different function in humans. When the chimpanzee enhancers are humanized by introducing 13 of the 16 human-specific substitutions, gene expression was observed in the limb, indicating that the substitutions that were identified by comparative analysis were directly responsible for the functional modification. In a recent study, 16 human-specific mutations in HACNS1 were also found in Neanderthals, suggesting that the phenotypic function that is related to this region was also expressed in Neanderthals [81]. The comparison can be extended to other human accelerated CNS regions to identify any substitutions that occurred after the divergence of humans from Neanderthals.
Conserved regions have also been presumed to play important roles in developing certain functions in humans-for instance, noncoding regions of 150 presynaptic genes in humans are highly conserved and may have critical regulatory roles in the expression of these genes [82]. Comparative analyses of these regions between different populations of modern humans and Neanderthals may give directions to a better understanding of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. Involvement of noncoding sequences in the developing brain was also revealed by another experiment involving 49 human accelerated regions (HARs); the most accelerated region in the human genome, HAR1, is part of a noncoding RNA sequence expressed in the developing brain [83]. A study by Burbano et al. [83] identified that 8.3% of HAR substitutions are not shared between modern humans and Neanderthals, but the study did not focus on HAR1. A complete Neanderthal genomic sequence should provide an understanding of the evolutionary origin of these regulatory RNAs.