The co-evolution of pathogenic bacteria and their hosts leads to the generation of functional pathogen-host interfaces. Well-adapted pathogens have evolved a variety of strategies for manipulating host cell functions to guarantee their successive colonization and survival. For instance, a group of gram-negative bacterial pathogens produces a toxin, known as cytolethal distending toxin (CDT) [1]. Among the vast majority of CDT producers are Escherichia coli, which is commonly found in the intestines of humans and other mammals. Most E. coli strains are harmless commensals; however, some isolates can cause severe diseases and are designated as pathogenic E. coli. Among the various pathogenic E. coli strains, some have acquired virulence determinants through the horizontal transfer of genes, such as the cdt genes encoding CDTs. CDTs were the first bacterial toxins identified that block the eukaryotic cell cycle and suppress cell proliferation, eventually resulting in cell death. The active subunits of CDT toxins exhibit features of type I deoxyribonuclease-like activity [23].
In this study, comparative genome analysis of CDT-producer E. coli isolates with other pathogenic and commensal strains was performed. Alignments between multiple genomes led to the identification of a set of distinct (“signature”) sequence motifs. These signature sequences could be used to delineate single genomes or a specified group of associated genomes within a desired group, such as the CDT-producing E. coli (the target group in this study). While genomic signatures were conserved in the target group, which they were not conserved or were absent in other related or unrelated genomes (i.e., the background group). From a clinical point of view, conserved signature sequences could offer advantages in predicting and further designing novel CDT inhibitors to vaccine candidates [4].
On the other hand, phylogenic trees can be constructed based on multiple sequence alignments. It is important that phylogeny based on an immense number of genes and whole-genome sequences are more reliable than those based on a single gene or a few selected loci [5]. Phylogenic analysis can provide an overall classification of the target group among the background group. Alignment of whole-genome sequences yields detailed information on specific differences between genomes and, consequently, has shed new insights into phylogenetic relationships in recent years [6789].
In this study, phylogenic relationships of CDT+ strains with other pathogenic and commensal E. coli strains were assessed, and conserved signature genomic regions in the target group (CDT-producers) were annotated. This information could be used for developing molecular diagnostics assays, polymerase chain reaction primer and probe design in modern vaccines.