Selection of ethnicity-specific genetic variations: ESNPs and ECNPs
To investigate the distribution of ESNP and ECNP markers in Pan-Asian ethnic groups, we performed the following steps, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. First, we classified the ethnic groups into 3 hierarchical categories by population estimation of the phylogenic analysis (in Supplementary Fig. 2): superpopulation (clustering size = 4), subpopulation (ESNP clustering size = 12, ECNP clustering size = 11), and ethnic population (ESNP clustering size = 72, ECNP clustering size = 60). The clustering size in parentheses refers to how many distinct populations were used in the ESNP and ECNP analysis. The superpopulations consisted of African, Caucasian, American Indian, Asian, and outlier (Indian and Uyghur) populations. The subpopulations comprised population groups based on linguistic similarities and population structures and 2 additional groups (Mongoloid features [IN-NI]/Mongoloid features [IN-TB] and China Uyghur [CN-UG]), and the ethnic populations represented each ethnic group. Second, we identified ethnicity-specific variations based on SNPs and CNPs markers using the nearest shrunken centroid method (NSCM), which is not affected by the minor-allele frequency [15, 16]. The NSCM of the R package pamr carried out multiple tests for genetic heterogeneity and frequency spectrum on genes having ethnicity-specific variants. It shrinks each of the class centroids toward the overall centroid for all classes by a threshold. This shrinkage makes the classifier more accurate by eliminating the effect of noise. This method is a suitable attempt to solve the classification problem when there are a large number of features from which classes and a relatively small number of cases are predicted, and it is a significant approach to identify which features contribute most to the classification [15]. Third, we identified specific ethnic groups that correlated with each SNP or CNP. Finally, to investigate the characteristics of ethnicity-specific variations, we obtained the top 10% of ESNPs and ECNPs markers.