DTC genetic testing, also known as at-home genetic testing, refers to genetic tests that are sold directly to consumers via the internet, television, or print advertisement without necessarily involving health care providers. Su [5] grouped the reasons for using DTC genetic tests into three categories; identity (such as ancestry, paternity, or ethnicity)-seeking; disease risk-testing to complement health care; and curiosity-driven testing. DTC genetic testing has its pros and cons. It is more accessible and affordable than traditional genetic tests, which usually target one specific gene at a time. DTC testing companies and many personalized medicine advocates argue that knowing the genetic risks for potential diseases will help people to improve their health and wellness by changing what they can and managing what they can not, as claimed in 23andMe's TV commercial [6]. 23andMe, one of the largest DTC genetic testing companies, also made the same claims and has offered the PGS to >475,000 customers since 2007 [7]. 23andMe's PGS genotypes the DNA sample on their custom single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip and provides health reports on 254 diseases and traits, including carrier status and drug response, which, the company claims, enables customers to personalize their health care. Additionally, some proponents suggest, as another argument, that DTC genetic testing can contribute to the empowerment of consumers by increasing knowledge and to subsequent democratization of health care [5].
However, many geneticists and physicians have rejected the claims. They believe that since DTC genetic testing is not reliable enough to be used clinically, it will just end up increasing health care costs unnecessarily [8]. Apart from its scientific weaknesses and insufficient clinical utility, there are other concerns raised by critics, including psychological and financial damage to consumers, especially by unreliable test results, health care inequity, and genetic privacy.
Since we believe that scientific validity is the foremost foundation of DTC genetic testing and should presuppose its clinical usage, we will focus on it in this review. There are quite a few scientific limitations to genome-based health risk estimation services in general, not just 23andMe's PGS, but they may not be apparent, even to medical professionals, who do not have enough knowledge in genetics and genomics, as well as lay customers. First of all, for monogenic disorders, DTC genetic testing panels include a small fraction of known disease-causing mutations or sometimes just include mutations present only in specific populations. This incompleteness of testing results in misinterpretations, which makes its clinical value doubtful. Also, for polygenicmultifactorial disorders and conditions, DTC testing panels include only a small percentage of the markers among many known associated markers, not to mention unknown ones, which also makes the risk prediction incomplete and, as a result, inaccurate. We also should not forget that gene-gene and gene-environment interactions are not taken into consideration for risk estimation at all. In addition, it is hard to say that their algorithms for estimating total combined risks are very well validated. In summary, genome-based DTC tests are incomplete, and the interpretation of their results is hardly valid. The biology is much more complicated than some health care entrepreneurs believe, and genotypes and sequences are not information but are just basic tools to use for understanding biology. Even in the case of valid associations that have been replicated by many studies, the effect sizes of most SNPs on specific diseases seem to be small to modest [9]. Secondly, even though their customers are provided detailed background information on the method used for genotyping and the statistical interpretation, which supposedly helps their understanding, there is still ample possibility for misconceptions.
Some professional societies have issued statements on DTC genetic testing. The American College of Medicine Genetics said, in their 2003 statement, that due to the complexities of testing and counseling, patients' use of DTC genetic testing kits may pose harms, which include the following: test utilization for inappropriate purposes, misinterpretation of test results, and lack of necessary follow-up [10]. In 2007, the American Society of Human Genetics also expressed their concerns in a statement on DTC genetic testing, saying that consumers are at risk of harm if the quality of tests is not high enough-i.e., the analytical or clinical validity and clinical utility of tests are not appropriate [11]. Analytical validity shows how accurately and reliably the test detects a specific genetic variant. Clinical validity shows how well the genetic variant is related to the existence or risk of a specific disease or condition. Clinical utility shows how likely the test can improve patient outcomes [12]. Consumers are also at risk of harm if claims made about tests are misleading or simply false and if information and counseling are not properly provided to enable the consumer to make an informed decision about whether to take the test or not and about what actions to take after the genetic test [11]. Due to these criticisms and repeated interventions from regulators, including the US FDA, especially in the United States, the DTC market does not look very promising at this moment. Even one Nature Editorial said that DTC genetic testing is not yet a viable business model, and most firms in the market have stopped providing services involved with personal disease risk estimation or have even totally shut down [2].