Accurate detection of genomic alterations, especially druggable hot spot mutations in tumors, has become an essential part of precision medicine and medical research. Due to the advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, the ability to identify mutations has increased enormously, which has facilitated the realization of precision medicine [1]. However, even with NGS technology, the amount of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data is too large to handle by most researchers or clinicians. Whole-exome sequencing (WES), which targets the protein-coding sequences of whole genomes, is more efficient and cost-effective than WGS. Therefore, WES data are the most commonly generated NGS data in the research field [2]. However, the amount of WES data is too vast for clinicians to analyze and use in clinical practice, requiring an expert. In addition to data size issues, analyzing WES data needs experienced bioinformaticians, which is another big hurdle for clinical translation and application to basic research. The limited amount of available druggable targets is another practical limitation of WES for clinical translation.
Compared with WES and WGS, targeted sequencing uses target enrichment methods to capture or amplify regions of interest. With targeted sequencing, we can get deeper coverage of reads and handle data more easily with relatively lower cost and less time. For these reasons, targeted sequencing is noted to identify hotspot mutations and copy number alterations (CNAs) in cancer-related genes in the clinical field and research. It enables one to diagnose quickly and accurately and suggest appropriate therapeutic approaches that can elicit a favorable treatment outcome [3–5]. The flexibility of designing the number of genes and areas of interest is another advantage of a customized panel. In the new era of precision medicine, a number of institutes have developed customized target sequencing tools for discovering effective therapeutic agents [6–8].
In spite of these advantages, the performance of customized panels must be validated, such as evenness of on-target rates and their sensitivity/specificity in detecting mutations [9]. We recently developed a customized NGS panel, named OncoChase-AS, for targeted sequencing of major solid cancers. In this study, we aimed to validate its performance.