Overview of patients
The prototype version of the new interactive visualization system provides the set of views addressing the needs described above. The visualization provides a global overview of the entire cohort structure and the relative patient-to-patient comparisons but then allows the analyst to drill into the details of the relationships. Displaying the entire visual structure at once allows analysts to move rapidly to any location in the space. This makes less effort to navigate across the large structures and explore specific parts.
We utilized and extended our former works [31, 32] to provide a flexible, simple, yet powerful interface of the patient population in the similarity space. The visualization is capable of displaying both 2D and 3D visual projections of the same structure and switching between them from the same "area" in the dataset (see Figs. 2 and 3). Although each user might have a different preference, the 2D visualization is normally a better choice, thanks to its simplicity and familiarization to the analyst, its flexibility in interaction and attributed mapping, no obscuration, and perspective correction. The following sections are limited to the 2D version that was extended from TabuVis [31]. It is a robust and powerful visual analysis system that provides flexible, customizable, and effective visualization for multidimensional data. Our innovation lies in the ability to provide an easy-to-use yet effective way to view multidimensional data at different angles by mapping various attributes to different visual properties.
Key aspects for visually analyzing data with multiple attributes are quality and appropriateness of the analytical platform whose presentation can be adjusted via domain experts. The extended system consists of multiple components enabling the analysis process, including data processing, automatic marks, customizable visualization via interaction, control attributes, filtering, statistical display, save/open works, and many other figures.
The overview visualization supports several data types, including Integer, Float, Text (string), Boolean (true/false, yes/no, or 0/1), Date (with various format), Date and Time, and Percentage. The data types are categorized into two groups: Categorical (text and boolean) and Quantitative (integer, float, date, date and time, and percentage). We also map each data type to a color for better identification, particularly text → dark blue, boolean → blue, integer → red, float (and percentage) → orange, and date (and time) → purple. The color scheme can be easily modified via a property file and/or menus when running (see Fig. 2).