Targeted metagenomics refers to a metagenomic approach that surveys genes or genomic regions of particular interest by targeted methods (activity- and sequence-driven studies) [8]. Sequence-driven targeted metagenomics is normally conducted by PCR-based directed sequencing of environmental genomic DNA. Ribosomal RNA genes (e.g., small subunit [SSU] and large subunit [LSU]) have been used as taxonomic marker genes for identifying microbial species. The characteristics of having both highly conserved and variable regions have allowed for accurate taxonomic identification and made it easier to design primers targeting the whole taxa of interest. Although taxonomic resolution of the 16S rRNA gene is not sufficient for delineating taxa at the species or strain level in some cases [9], the SSU of ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) has been used widely as a standard marker gene in prokaryotes. For the last few decades, molecular methods to assess microbial diversity have focused on rRNA genes using probe-based approaches, such as fluorescent in situ hybridization and microarray, fingerprinting methods, and molecular cloning. Some of them are still in use, but in this review, we focus mainly on sequence data generated by recent NGS techniques.
Microbial community profiling using taxonomic marker genes (e.g., 16S rRNA gene) commonly uses an operational taxonomic unit (OTU)-based approach, as the sequence-based species definition in microbes is still vague and current public databases still do not reach the full extent of microbial diversity, despite the massive sequencing efforts. This OTU-based approach is now generally accepted in most microbial community studies based on environmental samples. Over the last few years, 454 pyrosequencing has been a major source of generating amplicon metagenomics data among NGS platforms due to its capability of producing a relatively longer read length. Therefore, bioinformatic analysis tools dealing with sequence data have been developed and tailored for pyrosequencing results. More detailed information about the algorithms and processes at each step can be found in several other reviews [7, 10]. In this part, we introduce recent tools and databases and provide brief explanations about how they work in the course of the analysis workflow (Table 1) [11-29].