The Peg3 domain shows many similar features as seen in other imprinted domains, which include its conserved genomic structure, allowing long-distance transcriptional regulation through ICRs, as well as allele-specific DNA methylation and subsequent monoallelic expression. In the past two decades, these unusual features have been studied extensively using other imprinted domains as model loci. At the same time, the Peg3 domain displays several unique features that have not been studied in other imprinted domains. These unique features are thus worthwhile to study in the future in increase our understanding of genomic imprinting and imprinting-related human disorders. First, YY1/YY1-binding sites appear to be a major player in the Peg3 domain. In particular, a tandem array of YY1-binding sites has been selected for the function of the Peg3-DMR; yet, the molecular basis for this function is still unknown. One possibility would be that these multiple YY1-binding sites might be involved in setting DNA methylation during oogenesis. The other possibility would be that these YY1-binding sites might be required for the transcriptional control of Peg3 and adjacent imprinted genes. Targeting these YY1-binding sites through mutagenesis experiments should provide a clear and direct answer regarding the in vivo role of multiple YY1-binding sites. Second, Peg3 has been recognized as a potential tumor suppressor for some time, without any progress in our understanding. According to recent studies, Peg3 may play a major role in regulating autophagy of endothelial cells, which is very intriguing, due to the following reasons: 1) Peg3 is highly expressed in the organs that are regarded as endothelial cell-rich tissues, such as placenta, and 2) autophagy is also regarded as part of apoptotic pathways. Thus, characterizing the potential roles of Peg3 in autophagy should be a worthy project in the immediate future. Third, the Peg3 domain appears to have evolved very rapidly during mammalian evolution. As a consequence, several members of this 500-kb domain have changed from protein-coding to ncRNA genes. It is well known that the ancestral state of a given genomic interval cannot be easily reconstructed, due to the many changes that have accumulated during long evolutionary times. In the case of the Peg3 domain, its 500-kb genomic structure has been so well preserved that its ancestral structure can be readily reconstructed by comparing the Peg3 domains of several mammals. Thus, careful sequence analyses should provide immediate insights regarding the evolutionary paths of mammalian genes, especially those that have undergone the transformation from protein-coding to non-coding RNA genes. Overall, these directions are worthwhile to pursue in the near future, which should most likely provide additional exciting information regarding how the Peg3 domain is regulated and what functional roles the Peg3 domain plays in mammalian biology.