In bacteria, regulatory ncRNAs have emerged as key players, acting by various mechanisms to modulate metabolic, physiological, and pathogenic processes, as well as bacterial adaptive immunity [41]. The largest group of regulatory ncRNAs consists of regulatory sRNAs, which affect the transcription, translation, and stability of target mRNAs through base pairing with the targets (Fig. 2C). These sRNAs can work in cis by overlapping their target genes encoded on the opposite DNA strand of the same genomic locus or in trans by targeting genes located elsewhere on the chromosome [41, 42]. Therefore, the discovery and characterization of bacterial sRNAs are critical for the understanding of the complexity of bacterial transcriptomes. Primary transcriptome analysis allows one to detect the presence of sRNAs at their abundance in a genome-scale by measuring nonprotein-coding RNA transcripts. For instance, an unexpected 60 sRNAs have been discovered in the primary transcriptome analysis of H. pylori, indicating that the complexity of gene expression in the small H. pylori genome is increased by genomewide antisense transcription [9]. In this way, many sRNAs were recently discovered from various bacterial species, including the opportunistic pathogen Burkholderia cenocepacia (13 sRNAs), Salmonella Typhi Ty2 (55 sRNAs), and L. monocytogenes (50 sRNAs). The sRNAs from B. cenocepacia and L. monocytogenes were induced during niche switching and involved in virulence, respectively [16, 43, 44]. Furthermore, comparing of the sRNAs with global gene expression could be facilitated in the analysis of a set of genes that are mainly involved in the pathogenic features of B. cenocepacia. In addition, immunoprecipitation of specific RNA-binding proteins can lead to selectively enriched sRNAs [8]. The first attempt at sRNA analysis, based on the NGS technique (RIP-seq), was carried out in Salmonella [29]. Using the RNA-binding property of Hfq proteins, Hfq-associated RNAs could be enriched and analyzed by immunoprecipitation of Hfq-RNA complexes, followed by deep sequencing. Through this study, more than twice as many new sRNAs were discovered over previously known sRNAs [29]. These results indicate that sRNAs are abundant in the bacterial transcriptome, representing its regulatory complexity.