During the past decade, the ENCODE project has evolved into a genomewide scale, and the dataset it generated has expanded in quantity as well as in scope. The ENCODE project has provided a global view about the human transcriptome and most noticeably found that the transcribed region of the human genome is more abundant than we previously thought. This finding significantly reduced the so-called intergenic regions, as defined in the traditional sense. The quantitative measurement of RNA species in several cellular compartments as well as their polyadenylation provided a comprehensive view of RNA generation. In this review, we have revisited the characteristics of both coding and noncoding transcripts in association with their structures and locations in cells.
Besides the human transcriptome and the associated chromatin modification data that we discussed, the ENCODE consortium also mapped transcription factor binding sites and their associated DNA motifs, as well as DNA methylation and long-range chromosomal interactions [4]. In parallel, the Roadmap Epigenomics Project (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org) and International Human Epigenome Consortium (http://www.ihec-epigenomes.org) have been accumulating data of a similar scale to understand the human genome in other tissues and conditions. It is remarkable that the ENCODE data altogether have associated more than 80% of the human genome with some type of biochemical function so far, and the coverage will continue to increase as we map additional protein-DNA interactions in the near future. It has now become very clear that so-called "junk DNA" is not evolutionarily vestigial but has specific structural or biochemical functions.
While data generation has been a major goal of ENCODE, the need to integrate the current datasets is becoming more and more important. Computational approaches have been developed to exploit the ENCODE data at to a fuller potential. For instance, chromatin features were used to model gene expression [57, 61]; integrative methods were developed to annotate genomes [62-64]; visualization tools were developed to investigate epigenomic regulation at a global scale (also see ngs.plot at https://code.google.com/p/ngsplot/) [65, 66]; and large regulatory networks were reconstructed, based on TFs and DNaseI footprinting [67, 68]. The network-based approach as well as the chromosomal interactions [69] provided novel angles in studying gene regulation at higher levels. New approaches to integrate the large amount of data to provide new biological insights are on the horizon.