There are several distinctive features of facial morphology found in Koreans compared to western populations. First, the nose of Koreans tends to be relatively shorter and broader than that found in Italians [26], Caucasians [27], and Latvian [28] populations. Koreans also have a relatively narrower face (zy-zy) and wider mandible (go-go), and eyes (en-ex) when compared to Italians and wider intercanthal width (en-en), narrower width of the mouth (ch-ch), and longer special upper face height (g-sn) and length of the auricle (sa-sba) than Caucasians. Compared to Latvians, Koreans have broader (zy-zy and go-go) and longer (tr-gn) faces, narrower binocular width (ex-ex) and length of the eye fissure (en-ex), and wider intercanthal width (en-en).
The heritabilities that were significant for 13 phenotypes had a wide range of values (h2 = 0.25-0.61). Previous papers have reported estimated heritabilities of craniofacial anthropometric traits, and the results have been in agreement with ours. In one study based on an Indian population, the heritabilities of nasal height and breadth were 0.42 and 0.50; in addition, that of facial height and bizygomatic breadth were 0.41 and 0.61 [29]. Another study enrolling a Chuvasha pedigree reported that the heritabilities of nasal height, physiognomic facial height, bizygomatic breadth, and bigonial breadth were 0.42, 0.38, 0.58, and 0.50, respectively [14]. The other paper targeting orbital traits of Brazilians reported that the heritabilities of intercanthal width, biocular width, and length of the eye fissure were 0.39, 0.34, and 0.51 [30]. Recently, we reported the heritabilities and suggestive genetic loci associated with ocular and nasal traits in an isolated Mongolian population [31]. The heritabilities in Mongolians (h2 = 0.48-0.90) were slightly higher than those of Koreans (h2 = 0.25-0.61). The difference between the two populations can be explained by the low level of genetic heterogeneity and environmental effects in the isolated population model.
Several groups have reported that vertical facial variables displayed greater genetic effects than horizontal facial variables [8, 9, 32]. However, another group has challenged this by presenting an opposite result, although it was found not to be statistically significant [14]. The results obtained in our study support for a greater genetic effect of the horizontal craniofacial variables, where vertical variables (tr-gn, tr-g, g-sn, and sn-gn) displayed less heritability than the horizontal variables (zy-zy and go-go). A similar pattern was also observed for the nose region.
We were able to identify 3 latent factors related to facial measurements through factor analysis (Table 5). Factor 2 showed relation to the orbital region: intercanthal width (en-en), biocular width (ex-ex), and length of the eye fissure (en-ex). When we consider the early development of the face, there are very unique processes for making eyes and orbits. Factor 2 may be related with one of the common regulators controlling these processes. Factor 3 included vertical length values in the upper face region (special upper face height [g-sn] and height of the nose [n-sn], and physiognomical height of the face [tr-gn]). Because all three values are related with vertical length of the nose (n-sn), this factor may be related with the early developmental process of the nose from the lateral and/or medial nasal prominence. Factor 1 was mainly related to the lower portion of the face-height of the lower face (sn-gn), width of the mandible (go-go), width of the nose (al-al), and width of the mouth (ch-ch) and this part was made from the maxillary and mandibular prominences of the first pharyngeal arch. However, there remains the possibility that Factor 1 is related with a general factor rather than a specific regulator, because 7 of the 14 measurement values had loading scores above or very close to 0.6.
Such findings are indicative of a necessity to categorize each facial portion into different classes to improve our understanding of facial genetics. In previous studies, however, the concept of factor analysis in the genetic study of facial morphology was mainly confined to horizontal and vertical measures. Hence, this new concept of facial regions in the current report may provide significant insight into the genetic study of facial morphology.
Factors that are explained by a common facial variable can have a higher genetic variance than each facial measurement [33]. Factor 1, related to the lower face, also indicated the highest genetic variance (h2 = 0.55, SE = 0.12), which was significantly higher than the mean of each trait (mean h2 = 0.36). The estimated heritabilities for Factor 2 and Factor 3 also showed a similar trend (h2 = 0.52, SE = 0.15; mean h2 = 0.44 and h2 = 0.45, SE = 0.13; mean h2 = 0.34, respectively) (Table 6). They suggest that the factors reflect the genetic effect well than when compared to each original measurement in the regions.
Additionally, this study employed a bivariate model to investigate shared genetic effects for all pairs of facial measurements within each factor. We estimated the genetic and environment correlations and found 5 pairs with a statistically significant genetic correlation: 1 for Factor 1 and 2 each for Factor 2 and Factor 3. The significant genetic correlation ranged from 0.74 to 1.00, which suggested that there exists a large genetic portion simultaneously affecting facial measurements in each factor.
To date, various study designs have been employed for identifying the genetic effects of a specific trait where, in general, family, twin, or sibling designs were preferentially chosen. Amongst these three, the family design has many advantages. Firstly, familial correlation and relative risk can be estimated [34]. Secondly, a family study is likely to increase statistical power for finding causative genes and inheritance modes [35] where, especially, a large expended pedigree provides sufficient evidence of linkage as well as maximum statistical power [36].
A variety of methods for measuring facial length or size have been introduced by many researchers [37]. Simple and direct measurement using calipers takes a lot of time and effort and has the probability of incorporating errors between different observers. Another method of facial measurement is radiographic cephalometry, which has the advantage of observing hard tissue, such as bones, but this method is not suited for facial morphology, since it requires high cost and is time-consuming and is thus not suited for large-scale epidemiology. An alternative method used in this study was 2D digital photography. Although this method is difficult to locate bony structures under the skin, which is necessary to determine facial landmarks as well as measure curved surfaces, this has several advantages. The pictures are quickly obtainable and the measurements can be permanently stored. Observers can be trained easily for precise and unbiased measurement. Radiographic cephalometry is selected for clinical patient care, whereas photographic method is better for investigating facial morphology in a large epidemiological study [20], thereby suggesting that each method for facial measurement should be chosen to fit the purpose of the study; we found our choice of photographic method to be reliable and useful in our study.
Our study has several new aspects and advantages: we provide the first reliable data for facial morphology for the Korean population; we tried a new approach to study faces using factor analysis; and the family data containing a large extended pedigree used in this study provided high statistical power for estimating heritability. Yet, this study is not without caveats. The most obvious limitation in this study is the small sample size. Since the number of subjects was not large enough, the familial correlations between first-degree relatives, especially most sibling pairs, might not have been statistically significant. In our results, the familial correlations of parent-offspring pairs were relatively more significant than those of sibling pairs (Table 4). This is probably due to a relatively small number of sibling pairs than parent-offspring pairs. For the heritability estimation of the 14 phenotypes, the value for width of the mouth (ch-ch) was found to be the smallest and not statistically significant. This may be due to the change in facial expression while taking photographs (emotion or tension), causing variability in width of the mouth (ch-ch). Facial tension created during unusual situations, such as while taking photographs, can influence the measurements, especially for the width of mouth, because of the likelihood for this region to be affected by psychological tension compared to other measurement parts. In addition, we were not able to provide enough data for each age in children, which is an important basis for the diagnosis of congenital facial anomalies.
In conclusion, we have verified the genetic effect on facial anthropometric traits and suggested a potential way to categorize and analyze the facial portions into different groups. Despite many reports on congenital diseases with accompanying facial anomalies, the understanding of common genetic mechanisms, including specific genes that determine the facial morphology in general healthy populations, is still obscure. Our report is a step towards understanding this. Validation with the results of other studies involving varying populations, in addition to studies on genetic linkage association or biologic studies, is warranted for furthering our understanding of this subject.