In 2011, the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) consortium released the ChromHMM chromatin state annotations for 9 consolidated epigenomes, where ChromHMM is software developed by ENCODE labs, to integrate multiple chromatin datasets of various histone modifications to discover de novo the major combinatorial and spatial patterns of marks [1, 2]. The 15-chromatin-state model of the ENCODE Project consists of 15 states that are publicly available through 9 Browser Extensible Data (BED) files [3]. Since, large-scale epigenetic datasets such as ENCODE have become publicly available, a growing interest has been shown in predicting the function of non-coding DNA regions directly from sequence by utilizing these large-scale ChromHMM annotations [4–7].
On the other hand, many researchers have shown that formal language theory is an appropriate tool in analyzing various biological sequences [1, 2]. The hidden Markov model (HMM) is most closely related to regular grammars, because an n-gram is a subsequence of n items from a given sequence, and language models that are built from n-grams are actually (n-1)-order Markov models. We therefore proposed n-gram probabilistic language models for predicting the functions of ChromHMM regions of ENCODE [8]. In our previous study, we performed preliminary experiments to test whether the DNA sequences contained in each different chromatin unit of the ENCODE project possess the Markov property by applying Markov chains built from the two BED files of ENCODE tier 1 cell lines (GM12878, a B-lymphocyte lymphoblastoid cell line; and K562, a leukemia cell line) [8]. Our rationale for using the n-gram model was that each of the sequences contained in the ChromHMM chromatin states can follow a linguistic grammar, not merely as a form of short fragments of motifs or DNA signatures, but as a continuous and longer fragment of sequences.
Our simulation studies showed that some of these chromatin states possessed strong Markov properties of DNA sequences, and could even be predicted by the naïve Bayesian classifier. However, our model could have been biased, as our n-gram analyses were conducted only on two of the cell lines.
Thus, as a follow-up to our preliminary study on ENCODE datasets [8], we extend our previous study and continue our ongoing efforts to build comparative nucleotide frequency profiles to detect Markov properties by analyzing the datasets of the full range of 9 cells and tissue types provided by ENCODE. It was therefore critical to propose a new functional annotation framework that can be generalized to different cell types.
A generalizable framework can be achieved through statistically-justifiable models. We downloaded BED files from ENCODE and combined all the annotations spread out through 9 different BED files, into a single integrated BED file. Based on the newly integrated BED file, we assigned a dominant chromatin state for each 200-bp unit. We then rebuilt newer Markov chains by iteratively analyzing the variability count of the chromatin states of each 200-bp unit. By eliminating the highly variable 200-bp units, in our simulation studies we finally analyzed the active chromatin states that showed a strong Markov property.