Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of chronic autoinflammatory disease that affects the spine and sacroiliac joints. The pathogenesis of AS is not clear; however, it is believed to involve a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Among them, human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27) is the strongest genetic factor of AS. More than 80% to 90% of patients with AS express HLA-B27, and the association between HLA-B27 and AS has been identified in many ethnic groups [1]. However, only a small portion of HLA-B27–positive individuals (<5%) develop AS, suggesting a potential contribution of non-MHC genes to the susceptibility to AS [2].
A number of genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have identified non-MHC genes associated with AS, such as IL-12B, ERAP1, RUNX3, IL1R2, and ANTXR2 [3456]. In addition to SNPs, through genomewide copy number variant (CNV) analysis, CNVs associated with AS have also been identified [7]. These AS-associated non-MHC genes support the contribution of non-MHC genes to the susceptibility to AS. They can also be valuable markers of the development of AS.
From a clinical point of view, the identification of early AS before the appearance of radiological changes in the patient's spine or sacroiliac joint is important, because current treatment options, such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) inhibitors and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, after these changes have occurred cannot block or slow down disease progression [8]. Instead, many reports suggest that earlier treatment of TNF-α inhibitors may prevent the progression of AS more effectively [8910].
In our previous work, to identify AS-associated SNP candidates in Koreans, we selected seven AS-associated SNP candidates, which had been identified in Caucasians by a GWAS and consistently replicated in East Asians, and performed a replication study with 285 Korean AS cases and 363 healthy controls [11]. However, in contrast to our expectation, only one of them was replicated in Koreans. In this study, to identify other AS-associated SNP candidates, we selected three SNPs in non-MHC genes from previous GWASs [451213] that are associated with AS but have not been tested in Koreans—rs11249215 in RUNX3, rs6556416 in IL12B, and rs8070463 in TBKBP1—and examined them in a large cohort of Koreans with AS and healthy controls.