Kimchi is a salty, fermented preparation of cabbage that is widely consumed in the traditional Korean diet. Certain types of kimchi are prepared by mixing salted cabbage with spicy ingredients, such as red pepper powder, garlic, and ginger, while others are prepared without red chili pepper or are soaked in a savory liquid. Kimchi is prepared by mixing cabbage well with other vegetables, fish seasoning, and salt, and packing it into jars. The various unique microorganisms [1] and bioactive components present in kimchi have shown antioxidant activity and have been associated with an enhanced immune response, as well as anti-cancer and anti-diabetic effects. For example, components produced during the fermentation process show anti-cancer effects via the inhibition of the Ras oncogene signaling pathway [2], and anti-atherosclerotic effects are seen via a reduction in low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol oxidation [3456]. During the fermentation process, bacteria in the environment, predominantly from the genera Lactobacilli, Leuconostoc, and Weissella, produce byproducts that contribute to the pungent flavor of kimchi and include beneficial bioactive compounds [78].
In particular, the red chili pepper, the component of kimchi that makes it spicy, is a potent antioxidant due to its high vitamin C levels and capsaicin content. Furthermore, red pepper inhibits the decay of microorganisms and prevents food from spoiling. The physiological effects of kimchi thus originate from bioactive compounds present in its ingredients, and the functions of these are amplified by the fermentation process. Therefore, the health-promoting, probiotic, and functional properties of kimchi can be optimized by manipulating the types and amounts of ingredients, and by using appropriate probiotic starters and kimchi preparation methods such as fermentation. Optimally produced kimchi can be a very healthy food [9].
However, the available genome, biological pathway, and related disease data are still insufficient to explain the health benefits of kimchi. An integrated database of these data is not available, because it is difficult to control for the heterogeneous data types. Furthermore, biological processes are interrelated on many levels and their regulation presents complexity. These interactions must be understood in detail to successfully manage risks in the development of biological products. Evidence-based information on kimchi should be provided by both public and proprietary information sources, including public databases, experimental results from individual studies, text-mining analyses, and knowledge management systems. The model integrating this data would represent the accumulated knowledge in this domain that could be browsed and mined interactively. In this study, we have constructed the proper semantic data model and extracted integrated information on kimchi's nutritional content, and its effects on physiology and disease, based on analyses of the functional and biological characteristics of kimchi in the scientific literature.