Matrix or tensor decomposition methods for drug-related knowledge discovery
Matrix factorization or decomposition are important techniques for extracting information from a matrix or a tensor [48]. Basically, a matrix A∈ Rm×n refers to a m × n data array, which is suitable for storing and linking two entities. Meanwhile, an M-way tensor Rn1 ×n2 ×···×nM provides a higher ordered structure, which is capable of storing M different kinds of entities. The computational decomposition (sometimes called factorization) result of a matrix or a tensor led to a so-called low rank approximation of the original structure, and made a basis for novel link discovery.
If compared with great amount and various patterns of BioNLP research on drug-related knowledge discovery, the research of matrix or tensor decomposition was comparatively less, and more topic-specific. In general, the adaptable data structure made it possible to illustrate higher order links, while the lower rank approximation made it a suitable one for novel link discovery. A comprehensive review of mathematical illustration of the matrix decomposition (“also known as matrix factorization”) by Wang and Zhang’s work [49] listed basic notations, definitions and detailed ideas, while Kolda and Bader [50] provided another one for tensor decomposition, including the classic CANDE-COMP/PARAFAC (CP) and Tucker decomposition. To trace the rapid development of knowledge inference in the years of knowledge graph, Nickel et al.’s RESCAL algorithm [51] made good use of tensor structure for triple knowledge. In addition, Nimishakavi’s series work on higher order relation schema [52,53], and side information integration, were representative issues in higher order link discovery and multi-resource data fusion. Since this review is mainly for concluding research on drug-related knowledge discovery, the following section reviews the matrix and tensor level decomposition and applications on drug, respectively.
Matrix decomposition method
Matrix decomposition obtains a sum of lower-rank matrices, and then models a small number of factors [54]. A matrix decomposition models known associations, which predicts novel drug indications.
In 2013, Zheng et al. [55] predicted new drug-target interactions by using collaborative matrix factorization. In their work, three different datasets, such as drug-target interactions, DDIs, and target-target interactions were input to build three matrices. After matrix factorization, two low-rank matrices were obtained, which approximate to the known drug-target interaction matrix, and novel relationship predictions were able to perform by the new number in the approximate matrix. In this research, three kinds of data such as drug-target interaction, drug similarity, and target similarity were input into the three matrices separately.
Similarly, Liu et al.’s work [56] presented an integrated framework to create new therapeutic associations between drug-drug, drug-disease, and disease-disease by matrix decomposition. Zhang et al. [57] proposed two projections including low-dimensional drug projection and disease projection matrix, and utilized them to factorize the drug-disease matrix. Dai et al. [58] used three interaction data, including drug-disease, disease-gene, and drug-gene interactions, to predict drug-disease association. In their work, they clustered genes by using gene-drug interactions and gene-disease interactions, respectively, and two different clustering results consisted of two axes of matrix. After matrix factorization, the novel relations between the clusters were predicted. Through tracing backing to the corresponding disease and drug of the clusters, newly drug-disease relations were obtained.
Tensor decomposition method
Tensor decomposition appeared early in 1927 [59] and emerged into computer science applications in the 2000s. Tensors incorporate a multidimensional array of numerical data and are applied to various machine-learning tasks [48]. Similar to matrix factorization, tensor decomposition extracted a low rank approximation of drug data, while withholding more complex data structure. To that end, Ho et al. [60] utilized tensor decomposition, in an unsupervised manner, for EHR data, and extracted candidate phenotype generation through checking interactions of diagnoses and drugs among patients. Arany et al. [61] similarly used tensor decomposition to infer drug-protein interaction types: competitive or non-competitive. This was a novel idea in this research to design a 3-way tensor with cell ijk represented inhibition of the j-th protein with i-th drug for the k-th given inhibition measure, and to decompose the tensor by using side information of chemical features.
Basically, it was a natural idea to incorporate various drug-related information into the axes of a tensor, and achieve an imaginary knowledge structure. Khan et al. [62] proposed structural toxicogenomics complex tensors by creating structure matrices with drugs and structural descriptors, respectively, a gene tensor for diseases, and post-treatment gene expression, and a toxicity tensor with drug toxicity measurements. Decomposition of the complex tensors led to predictions of toxicity of unseen drugs. Afterward, Taguchi et al. [4] performed a series of studies on identified candidate drugs, especially drugs for heart failure [63], by integrating gene expression data into a tensor decomposition model. Unlike linking drug-protein, drug-toxicity, or drug-disease pairs, linking drug-consumer led to different applications, like drug recommendations. Wang et al. [64] likewise designed a 3-way tensor with “user,” “drug” and “label,” and constructed a precise drug recommendation model.
The above methods mainly fulfilled tensor axes with various drug-related domain data like gene expression or chemical features, and then a novel link discovery was mined out from the decomposed tensor. Meanwhile, a hybrid strategy of BioNLP and tensor decompostion came from Zhou et al. [65], who used AGAC corpus [38] as a training set to perform OMIM-wide text mining, and predict novel higher order links among five entities, including genes, mutations, functions, diseases, and functional changes. In this work, new nonzero cells in the decomposed tensors were treated as novel links, among five entities, and infer the functional change of a mutated gene. Finally, agonist/antagonist drug information was extracted from DrugBank [66], and applied to help linking “agonist vs. LOF” and “antagonist vs. GOF” pairs, for the purpose of drug repurposing.
Research pattern of novel drug-related knowledge link discovery in the form of matrix or tensor decomposition
Among the above research studies, the characteristics of matrix or tensor decomposition method enabled investigators to input multiple data, and thus provide more comprehensive information for prediction, which may elevate knowledge prediction accuracy. The research tendency of matrix or tensor decomposition on drug-related knowledge discovery is listed below.
(1) Matrix or Tensors are natural data structures to contain multiple arrays of drug-related entries. Paired knowledge entries are mapped into a matrix element, such as a drug-target, drug-drug pair, while three linked entities are mapped into a cell in tensor, such as “drug”, “user,” and “label,” in drug recommendations. Furthermore, higher order links are mapped into higher order tensors.
(2) Generally, novel link discovery is inferred from the novel nonzero cells in the decomposed matrix or tensor. Methods differ according to the chosen decomposition algorithm. For example, a new link is inferred from a core tensor after decomposition in a RESCAL-based tensor decomposition, while a nonzero cell in the approximated tensor counts as a novel link in a CP decomposition.
(3) Three way tensors were the most popular choice in the knowledge inference applications. As shown in Fig. 1, a 3-way tensor is favored more in a triple data structure than that in two matrices, thus making it convenient for high-order link data representation. It is straightforward to claim that a M-way tensor can provide a natural data structure to store higher-order links mentioning M entities. However, the higher the reach of the level, the more sparse the tensor is. This creates a computational bottleneck.
(4) Knowledge inference algorithms such as jointly decomposed matrices and tensors, bring the data fusion idea into the matrix or tensor decomposition strategy, and make it possible to perform a drug-related knowledge discovery, by incorporating various kinds of heterogeneous data.