In this report, we identified that the model proposed in a previous GWAS [18] is available to the Korean population. Furthermore, we found 13 genomic loci significantly associated with BMD variations in the population. Our results reveal that dozens of variants with small effects may contribute to the genetic architecture of BMD and have important roles, regardless of ethnic groups.
Our study supports the important role of several biological pathways related to BMD. The Wnt factor (WNT4) has been known to be associated with BMD in many studies [30,31,32]. A pathway involved in mesenchymal stem cell differentiation (SP7) was also previously known [33, 34]. The RANK-RANKL-OPG pathway (TNFRSF11B) is another pathway influencing BMD [35,36,37]. Interestingly, SNPs in TNFRSF11B and SP7 were associated with BMD-RT, whereas an SNP in WNT4 was associated with BMD-TT. It may suggest differential genetic influences between skeletal sites.
In line with this phenomenon, our results reveal that there is sex- and site-specificity underlying BMD variation. rs13204965 was only significant in women and showed significant sex heterogeneity. Also, in the same manner, the variant was only associated with females in a previous GWAS [18]. In a recent GWAS focusing on women of a specific age (postmenopausal women, age 55-85 years), rs13204965 was associated with BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar spine [13]. In case of rs13245690, a sex-stratified analysis in women showed a more significant result than in pooled samples. These results reflect the sexual dimorphism of bone. Based on the different composition at different skeletal sites, all 12 loci that were significant in pooled samples showed site specificity in BMD. Interestingly, even though the extent of effect size was different from skeletal sites, the direction was consistent between sites. This indicates that BMD-associated loci commonly affect BMD determination across skeletal sites, but the different sensitivity of each site may lead to differential genetic impact on BMD variation.
This could account for the decreased effect size of BMD loci in the Korean population. While the meta-analysis looked at the BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar spine, the KARE focused on BMD at the distal radius and midshaft tibia. Besides, the former were measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, but the latter were estimated as SOS by quantitative ultrasound. It has been previously shown that BMD of the radius, assessed by ultrasound, poorly coincides with radiologically assessed BMD at the lumbar spine [38]. These represent the limitations of this study- that direct replication at specific sites cannot be performed. Nevertheless, some loci found in the previous GWAS still showed a directionally consistent association in this study. This suggests that a common mechanism underlies BMD throughout different skeletal sites.
In order to identify putative functional variants, SNP-nexus was chosen to annotate proxy SNPs near the BMD-associated loci. In coding regions, some SNPs were expected to present single amino acid substitutions that could be damaging or tolerated. On the other hand, the other SNPs were expected to be synonymous. However, this type of mutation sometimes leads to unsuspected effects. Other annotated SNPs had possible functional effects on the regulation of splicing or the binding activity of transcription factors. To understand how genetic variants affect the phenotype exactly, multi-layered experimental approaches should be carried out in the future.
In conclusion, these findings highlight the polygenic and complex variation of BMD, which could differ even by sex and skeletal site, but provide evidence of the validity in BMD-associated loci between independent populations. This study may contribute to the importance of replication studies in GWASs in understanding the common mechanism underlying BMD.