Fusion detection
FusionScan scans all read alignments looking for split reads whose aligned loci are apart by more than 50 kilo base pairs (kbp) in the genome, a condition that most known gene fusions satisfy. To ensure reliable alignment, we demand the minimum aligned length ≥ 20 bp on both sides and that the aligned parts cover more than 50% of the entire read. Two aligned loci of the split read should be contiguous within the range of ±10 bp over the transcript coordinate. Detailed conditions and explanations with illustrative figures are available at the online documentation.
Read-through transcripts are fairly common in the human transcriptome. Co-transcription and intergenic splicing (CoTIS) creates chimeric transcripts connecting exons of two neighboring genes [29]. Thus, we removed the read-through transcripts between two consecutive genes on the same strand with 5′ and 3′ ends accordant to the genome annotation. It should be noted that removing read-through cases may remove some genuine gene fusions arising from genomic deletions. We also support filtering by the blacklist of gene fusions at this stage. The black list may include unduly frequent gene fusions or fusion predictions that have failed in experimental validation.
Since FusionScan is designed to identify fusion genes specifically composed of intact exons from two participating genes, we apply two steps of examining fusion boundaries. First, we scan the fusion boundaries on the split read so that they appear within 6 bp from the intact boundaries of fusion exons (i.e., exon boundary offset ≤ 6 bp) to proceed to the next step. The candidate split read is then realigned to the synthetic sequence of combined fusion exons using the bl2seq tool of BLAST with the word size of 20 [30]. Again, the minimum aligned length is 20 bp on both sides with the minimum percent identity ≥ 95%. Split reads satisfying all conditions given above are the seed reads that would strongly support the fusion event. For K562 cell line data shown in Fig. 1, the exon boundary condition and realignment against the synthetic chimeric transcript reduced the number of candidates considerably, and we obtained 92 fusion gene pairs for the filtering procedure.