Molecular bar-code arrays facilitate the parallel analysis of thousands of biological samples through a microarray [1]. In particular, the unique 20-bp DNA bar-codes or tags in each deletion strain enable the individual fitness of thousands of deletion mutants to be analyzed from a single pooled culture. In principle, the change in the number of cells of interest within the pooled library is visualized by the hybridization between fluorescence-labeled PCR amplicons of unique molecular bar-codes and their cognate probes on the array. This provides a powerful system for identifying the genes required for growth in any condition of interest [2].
These arrays are well known for their use with the tagged strains of yeast gene-deletion collections. Deletion collections have been constructed for budding yeast [3] and fission yeast [4,5]. Budding yeast is the pioneer model organism for gene-deletion collections, followed by fission yeast. As the two types of yeasts are distant within a phylogenetic tree [6], they play complementary roles in the systematic elucidation of gene function [7].
Among arrays for budding yeast [8,9], the first version of such an array (TAG3) was constructed with a 24-µm feature for each probe. In response to technological developments, the original TAG3 was improved to the TAG4 array. In particular, the feature size was reduced to 8 µm with a capacity of ~100,000 (100K). Furthermore, mismatch pairs and antisense-strand probes of each tag were removed, because they were proven to be uninformative. According to an analysis of data reproducibility, at most triple 8-µm features were needed to equal the performance of a single 24-µm feature. To test the ability of the TAG4 array to accurately measure differences in tag abundance, researchers conducted a signal ratio analysis and derived a correction function to adjust distorted intensity values due to the saturation effect.
Herein, we present detailed information on the optimization process of fission yeast arrays by incorporating useful pieces of information from earlier budding yeast arrays [8-10]. The optimization process of the array can reduce the inevitable defects caused by the innate hybridization bias. This study will provide a solid platform for fitness profiling using microarray technology.