All eukaryotic genomes carry introns as parts of some gene structures and the introns are to be eliminated by a complex molecular machinery called the spliceosome comprising five snRNAs and more than 150 proteins [12]. Although the debate on the origin of introns, i.e., the intron-early versus intron-late hypothesis, has still not been completed, it is obvious that most spliceosomal introns have been gained after prokaryote-eukaryote divergence [345], and there has been no spliceosomal introns found in prokaryotic lineages so far. The intron has still been propagating in some eukaryotic lineages [6], whereas other lineages have experienced extensive losses of introns during evolutionary life history [2]. Primates have a higher density of intronic sequences than primitive eukaryotes that diverged earlier in eukaryotic life history, such as yeast, Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans. Intron sequences constitute approximately 25% of the human genome, which is 4~5 times the size of exons [7]. It has been noticed that the number of genes varies little between these eukaryotic species ranging less than 2-fold from 14,000 genes to 25,000 genes, whereas the size of introns greatly varies up to several fold, implicating that introns might have roles in determining species-specific characteristics and complexities [8].
Introns certainly impose a huge energetic burden to the cell, considering that the density of introns (i.e., the genic regions consuming large amounts of energy for nothing in terms of protein synthesis) is greater than that of exons in genomes. The reasons that introns propagated in some eukaryotic genomes regardless of this energetic disadvantage have been issues yet to be explained. According to Lynch [9], introns are just selfish DNAs that invade protein-coding genes in eukaryotic genomes, and the deleterious introns can be sustained due to severe population bottlenecks. Many studies have discussed selective advantages that introns bring to the cell in eukaryotes, contributing to overcoming the energetic disadvantage [21011121314151617181920]. However, the results derived from different studies are still controversial so far [132122232425].
Recent multi-omics studies using a large-scale genome, transcriptome, and epigenome data produced by massively parallel sequencing techniques or next generation sequencing techniques provide an opportunity for us to investigate new territories in genomes and lead to novel functional insights into noncoding DNAs, intergenic regions, and introns. In the present review, we first introduce some studies showing what molecular characteristics of introns cannot be explained by a simple random mutational process that real junk DNAs may have undergone. Subsequently, we summarize the functional characteristics of introns that have been studied providing clues about the adaptive significance of introns in genomes. We divide the functional roles of introns into two different categories, i.e., direct roles and indirect roles in Table 1 [15262728293031323334353637383940414243444546], and demonstrate the details in the Results section.
It is problematic, though, that the 'function' of genes in molecular biology generally has been limited in the concept of 'protein function'. As recently intensively debated, 'biological function' should be extended to expression regulation by cis-acting elements located at the outside regions of protein-coding parts in genes [47], and that is what we mean in discussing intron function.