Using the KARE data, the current and recent effective population sizes of Korea were estimated, based on HWE and LE deviations, and the past changes in population sizes were derived, based on the pattern of LD decay. The results showed clear exponential growth of the Korean population, similar to CHB of the HapMap data. The population growth of China has been positive continuously since 1400, except for the period from 1683 to 1700 [41]. The censuses in the Joseon Dynasty period of Korea showed low rates of population growth in the 1800s [37]. The large recent Ne of the 69-year-old age group (born in 1933) indicates that Korea might have experienced continuous population growth at least in 1873, assuming a generation time of 20 years for the 3 most recent generations. A simulation result of rapid growth (Ne changes: 1000, 2000, 4000, 10,000) showed half (5,212) the current Ne [13]; however, the recent Ne of the 69-year-old age group was double the current Ne. Therefore, it is likely that the population growth started much earlier than 1873 [13, 14]. In the metropolitan area, people from all over the country might have increased the Ne. The migration effects and the discrepancy between the census and the results need more explanations.
The age-dependent Ne estimates showed good concordance with the actual modern history of Korea, although several of them require more explanation. Because of the inaccuracies in assigning the year of birth, a sample of the 58-year-old age group might be mixed with a sample of the age groups of 57 and 59. Although it is a rare occasion, individuals having genomic potential to increase current Ne in the 57 and 59 age groups might have been assigned to the 58-year-old age group accidently during the sample collection. In any case, the population growth in war time needs more explanation. In Fig. 3, the trend of recent Ne followed the trend of current Ne in many cases. Especially, the increased current Ne in 1943 contributed to the rapid increase in the recent Ne in the late 1950s as the individuals born in 1943 could contribute to reproduction. The recent Ne decreased rapidly in the 42-year-old age group (born in 1960), which needs explanation. The baby-boom individuals born in 1958 were 2 years old and could not contribute to giving birth. The recent Ne increased again in 1961 and 1962, possibly due to the contributions of individuals who were born in the previous baby-boom period and reached reproductive age.
In the previous studies, it was not necessary to analyze a large number of variants. However, the current study showed that the number of genotypes, as well as the number of individuals, might be important for the quality of the results to infer the past population history. In Supplementary Fig. 2, the estimates of many age groups were less consistent, even with larger numbers of samples than the sample sizes of the HapMap data. The smallest sample size for the former was 197, and the largest sample size for the latter was 143. However, the number of genotypes would not have had much influence much on the estimations of the current and recent Ne, as indicated in previous simulation studies [13]. Therefore, the possibility of lower genotype quality could not be excluded, either. It is also possible that inconsistent estimates were seen more in the CHB than in other populations, which showed the most rapid population growth. Because Korean populations showed more rapid population growth than CHB, the rapid growth might be the reason for the inconsistent estimates. With more genotypes, the increases in r2 estimates in chromosome 14 could also be seen clearly in Fig. 1, similar to CHB and JPT of the HapMap project.
The recent Ne of the total population was 2,518,501, which was incredibly large. Considering that the current Ne of the total population was 100,778, the KARE data showed that the population is under serious deduction of effective population size. The ratio of the current to recent Ne was 0.04. This small ratio might be due to migration and extreme population concentration to a metropolitan area. Migration might have had more influence on the recent Ne rather than the current Ne, because the recent Ne reflects the population that moved from all over the country. In addition, the division of the Korean peninsula after the Korean War might have resulted in the extreme ratio. The population moved to the metropolitan area from all over the country, but they could not move back to the northern part of the Korean peninsula. The ratio was not comparable to any of the HapMap data, in which 0.64 of JPT was the lowest, and all populations were concordant with their recent population changes. In Fig. 3, the tendency started in 1933 for the eldest ones in the data, and it became more severe as the age of the sampled individuals decreased. The total sample contains more relatively young individuals than elders; however, the ratio of 0.04 was too small. If the ratios were correct, as shown in the HapMap data, Fig. 3 shows that the significant reduction in effective population size began in 1953, right after the Korean War, probably due to migration and the division of the Korean peninsula. As indicated previously [13], the Ne estimates do not represent the actual population size exactly. Further studies for the effects of migrations and confinements with refined samples and data could be helpful.
The estimates of the current effective population size were 91,433 in the rural area and 76,097 in the urban area. The result was surprising, because the urban area is more populated than the rural area. The age distributions of each region differed significantly (Supplementary Fig. 3A). The sample of the urban area contains a smaller number of elders and a larger number of relatively young individuals; however, the sample of the rural area shows relatively even distribution, with a slightly larger number of elders (Supplementary Fig. 3A). If the current effective population sizes, depending on age, were examined (Supplementary Fig. 3B), the current effective population sizes of the rural area were relatively even compared to the current effective population sizes of the urban area. Some of the estimates were negative, which generally indicate large Ne values and sampling failures, considering the results of previous studies [13]. For the current Ne estimates of the urban area, the estimates were usually small, except for several estimates of relatively younger ages. The overall small uneven estimates and the uneven age distribution of the urban area might have resulted in the smaller current Ne estimate than the estimate of the rural area. The recent Ne of the rural area was 495,871, but the estimate of the recent Ne of the urban area was a negative value. As mentioned previously, the negative value might have come from a large Ne and sampling failure. Therefore, the negative recent Ne estimate of the urban area probably indicates an extremely large recent Ne. More studies are necessary to determine the effects of uneven age distributions, rapid population fluctuations, migrations, and population confinements on the Ne estimates.