Like eukaryotes, bacterial transcriptome analyses have been initiated by the development of microarrays [11]. In particular, high-density tiling arrays, which consist of hundreds of thousands of DNA oligonucleotide probes representing both strands of a given genome, have been massively used to study bacterial transcriptomes. The major advantage of tiling arrays is to interrogate the boundaries of the entire set of transcripts in a cell without taking account of genome annotation [12]. Consequently, this technical advance discovered many new RNA molecules, such as regulatory sRNAs. Based on this experimental approach, comprehensive transcriptomics have recently been published for Bacillus subtilis [13], Halobacterium salinarum [14], Mycoplasma pneumonia [6], Caulobacter crescentus [15], Listeria monocytogenes [16], and E. coli [10]. One of these studies, for example, focused on the analysis of transcriptionally active regions across an entire genome of Listeria monocytogenes, revealing the complete Listeria operon map as well as various types of RNAs, including at least two of which are involved in virulence in mice [16]. Although the high-density tiling arrays were able to interrogate the bacterial transcriptomes without genome annotation, the array-based approach is limited by a high rate of noise due to cross-hybridization, the low dynamic range of detection due to signal saturation, and the inability to detect low copy number of transcripts [17].
High-throughput sequencing of RNAs using NGS methods has overcome some drawbacks of the array-based approach. Currently, commercially available NGS systems include the Roche 454 system, based on the pyrosequencing; the Illumina sequencing system, based on sequencing by synthesis; the SOLiD system, based on sequencing by oligonucleotide ligation and detection; and the Ion torrent system, based on the use of a semiconductor-based sequencing technique [18, 19]. Also, third-generation sequencing technologies have been actively developed to determine the sequence directly from a single DNA molecule without DNA library amplification [18]. Over the conventional Sanger sequencing method, the primary advantage offered by NGS methods is the inexpensive production of large volumes of sequence data, which can be used to identify and quantify rare transcripts without prior knowledge of a particular gene [19, 20].
Unlike a hybridization-based array approach, RNA-seq allows unambiguous mapping of transcripts to unique regions of the genome with single-base resolution; hence, there is essentially lower background noise [21]. In addition to the accurate quantification of a transcriptome consisting of known genes, RNA-seq allows researchers to determine the correct gene annotation, expressed single-nucleotide polymorphisms, novel genes, and RNAs with high levels of reproducibility for both technical and biological replicates. However, bacterial mRNA can exist as little as 1% to 5% of total RNA; so, mRNA enrichment is a challenging step to obtain sufficient transcript coverage [8]. Currently, several methods are being used to remove the rRNA and tRNA fraction from the total RNA pool. Among those methods, terminator 5'-phosphate-dependent exonuclease treatment has been successfully applied to enrich primary transcriptome by reducing processed or degraded RNAs with a 5'-monophosphate end (e.g., rRNAs and tRNAs) [9, 10]. To remove the rRNA fraction from the total RNA pool, Ribo-Zero rRNA removal kits, using biotinylated probes that selectively bind rRNA, have been used successfully for a wide range of organisms, from bacteria to human (Epicentre).
The requirements of the ideal RNA-seq method are strand-specificity and quantitation across a wide dynamic range [22, 23]. However, a common strategy of an RNA-seq library preparation is to convert single-stranded RNA molecules into double-stranded cDNA fragments of certain sizes, flanked by platform-specific adapter sequences. This means that double-strand cDNA is synthesized from randomly primed hexamers, which cannot provide information on the transcribed strands. A major shortcoming of conventional RNA-seq methods is therefore the lack of RNA polarity information. The polarity of RNA transcripts is very useful in facilitating subsequent computational analyses, including the correction of novel gene annotations and the detection of overlapping genetic features encoded in opposite orientations. In particular, polarity information is important for understanding small bacterial genomes, in which genes are densely coded, with overlapping untranslated regions (UTRs) or open reading frames (ORFs) [23].
However, the recently developed strand-specific RNA-seq analysis enhances the value of bacterial transcriptomics. In terms of how to mark the transcribed strand, several methods can be categorized largely into two approaches. One is marking a strand by orientation-dependent adaptor ligation to the 5' and 3' ends of the RNA transcript, such as RNA ligation [24], SMART [25], NNSR priming [26], and SMART-RNA ligation [23]. The other is marking one strand by chemical modification, either on the RNA itself by bisulfite treatment [27] or on the second strand cDNA by dUTP incorporation [28]. Among several strand-specific RNA-seq methods, the dUTP method was identified as the leading protocol because of its wide range of coverage and availability of paired-end sequencing (Fig. 1A) [23]. Briefly, the dUTP method starts with converting the initial mRNA into cDNA. This first cDNA strand is used as a template for second cDNA strand synthesis, which incorporates dUTP instead of dTTP. After marking both ends of the cDNA by ligation of adaptor sequences, the second strand is subsequently degraded by uracil-N-glycosylase treatment, which selectively removes the uracil site on the DNA. Finally, the remaining first-strand cDNA, with directional adaptor sequences, can be sequenced on the Illumina Platform using both single-read and paired-end sequencing [28].
With these technological breakthroughs, several bacterial RNA-seq studies showed that bacterial transcription is not as simple as previously thought [10, 29-32]. For example, in the transcriptomic analyses of Salmonella typhimurium, E. coli, Vibrio cholera, and Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria, it was revealed that noncoding RNAs play an important role in diverse regulatory mechanisms [29-32]. In addition, the complexity of the E. coli transcription unit indicates that bacterial transcription is regulated by the differential use of diverse transcription start sites (TSSs), with corresponding transcription factors under given environmental conditions [10].