Fusobacterium nucleatum is a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium which plays vital role in the architecture of oral biofilms. This dominant oral bacterium is very much associated with periodontitis, a very common infectious disease worldwide. F. nucleatum also affects some other bodily infections such as peritonsillar abscesses, endocarditis, skin ulcers, and septic arthritis [1234]. Coincidentally, it may cause severe infections in a child's body. In many studies, F. nucleatum is appeared to be related with preterm birth and has been found in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and chorioamnionic membranes of women delivering ahead of time. Preterm birth is the leading cause of child mortality and morbidity, accounting for 7% to 11% of all births in the United States alone [5]. Moreover, many studies have linked F. nucleatum with colorectal cancer; in addition, a mechanism has been reported by which F. nucleatum promotes colonic tumor formation without following the usual mechanism of instigating colonic inflammation or otherwise irritating the colon tissue and thereby demonstrating a direct and specific colonic carcinogenesis [67].
Appropriate antibiotic therapy and surgical drainage constitute the basis for treating fusobacterial infections. However, the emergence of multidrug resistant strains of F. nucleatum has made it difficult to guide the choice of empiric treatment. The first case of resistance to penicillin by fusobacteria was reported in the mid-1980s. There is evidence of an increased frequency of β-lactamase production by fusobacteria [8]. The incidence of widespread resistance of Fusobacterium spp. to erythromycin and other macrolides has been reported as well [9]. Though antibiotics like clindamycin, chloramphenicol, carbenicillin, cefoperazone, cefamandole [10], and amoxicillin [11] are shown to be active against this pathogen, ever evolving antibacterial resistance [12], chances of cross resistance [13], and the associated untoward effects of antibiotics [14] persistently urge the researchers to explore more promising and safer drug targets. More importantly, increasing evidence of association between Fusobacterium and colorectal cancer has even more intensified this urge.
In this context, this study aimed to explore some potential novel drug targets other than the aforementioned targets. We have adopted an approach focusing on two important criteria. Firstly, the identified target protein should be indispensable for the survival of the pathogen. Secondly, the target protein should not be homologous to any protein of the human proteome. The nonhomolog property of these target proteins check the chance of the cross-reaction with the human host and thus ascertains highly selective therapeutic targets. This may facilitate minimizing the adverse reactions of the prospective drug [15]. In this way, we have identified some potential drug targets which are not only human non-homologous essential proteins in unique metabolic pathway of the pathogen but also circumvent the resistant mechanism of current targets [16]. Moreover, we have predicted the three dimensional (3D) structure of these target proteins and analyzed ligand binding sites and corresponding ligands of the best proteins to facilitate the search for novel drugs which might potentially arrest the growth of F. nucleatum.