Alu element is a primate-specific retrotransposon and has played an important role in primate genomic diversity. During the past six million years, 5,530 Alu elements newly inserted into the human genome [1415]. Most of them were propagated through classical insertion, in that, Alu elements are inserted into the human genome using TPRT mechanism. The hallmark of the classical Alu insertions is TSDs flanking both ends of an Alu element. However, Alu elements integrated through non-classical insertions are deficient of TSDs but have instead 1 to 7 bp microhomologous sequences on their pre-insertion site. When chromosomal double strand break (DSB) happens, Alu element is able to integrate into the genomic region through the HR between the elements and the chromosomal break site [1416]. Through the de novo insertion event, Alu elements have modified the human genome in a species-specific manner. In addition, they could disrupt genes by inserting into their exonic regions (Fig. 3A). Alu elements locating in the intronic region could also regulate gene function by promoting alternative splicing of the genes; the elements have multiple splice donor/accept sites (Fig. 3D). The alternative splicing generates Alu exonization or/and intron retention in respective transcripts, which could disrupt or modify the function of the genes (Fig. 3C and 3E) [817]. As mentioned above, Alu elements have a relatively high point mutation rate and can obtain splicing sites by the point mutations after the insertion. The Alu elements provide cryptic splicing sites and recognize these sites by splicing factors (Fig. 3C and 3D). Ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) gene encodes mitochondrial enzyme ornithine δ-aminotransferase, which converts ornithine to glutamate. The deficiency of this enzyme results in autosomal recessive eye disease. The third intron of OAT gene contains the right monomer of Alu element which is residues, 279 to 138, of antisense Alu element. The antisense Alu monomer provides cryptic splicing sites by the point mutation, cytosine to guanine. The cryptic splicing site causes an alternative splicing of the gene, disrupting the function of OAT gene. Consequently, patients suffer from gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina by producing abnormal proteins [18]. Alu elements can influence gene function through RNA editing which is a post-transcriptional alteration. Adenosine deamination by an enzyme, adenosine deaminase acting on RNA (ADAR) results in inosine, which in turn interpreted as guanosine by translation or spliceosome machinery. Adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) is the most frequent RNA editing in humans. A-to-I RNA editing occurs within a long duplex of RNA sequence because ADAR works only on double strand RNA structures. Due to the dimeric structure, Alu element in RNA sequences forms the stem loop structure, leading to A-to-I RNA editing [19]. In addition, two Alu elements located in close to each other can make a stem loop structure, which result in A-to-I editing and the edited Alu element could subsequently bring out novel alternative splicing site [1920212223]. On the other hand, the intronic Alu elements could lead to deletion of nascent exons, which is called exon skipping. It therefore disrupts open reading frames of the human genes (Fig. 3A). Ganguly et al. [24] have reported that intronic insertion of AluYb9 causes exon skipping and leads to hemophilia A disease. Hemophilia A is an X-linked disorder caused by exon skipping of exon 19 in Factor VIII gene. AluYb9 locates in the intron 18 of the gene and causes the skipping of the exon19 from the gene transcript.
Alu elements could regulate gene function by providing canonical polyadenylation signal, AATAAA (Fig. 3B) [2526]. Alu elements contain three potential polyadenylation sites and two of them are active in the human genome. One of the previous studies on Alu elements has reported that ~10,000 Alu elements are identified within the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of protein coding human genes. Among them, 107 Alu elements retain active polyadenylation site. Interestingly, 99% of polyadenylation-active Alu elements locate in the forward direction although the elements exist in the 3' UTR of human genes randomly, regarding the insertion direction. In addition, old Alu subfamily has more active polyadenylation sites than younger subfamilies [2728]. An example of Alu polyadenylation site affecting gene function is calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) which is a member of G protein-coupled receptor. The gene involves in regulating extracellular level of calcium ion. Alu element locates in the exon 7 of the gene and pre-terminates transcripts of CaSR by providing a stop codon signal. Patients having the missense mutations show symptoms of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia and neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism [293031].