Many important human traits are moderately to highly heritable [1]. Yang et al. [2] found that roughly 45% of the genetic variance of human height can be explained by the regression on common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). So-called dark matter of the genome in human height complex traits, especially, can be explained by the existence of gene-by-gene or gene-by-environment interactions [3,4,5]. Although the causal variants are not in complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the SNPs and although SNP-SNP interaction effects do exist, the traditional independent and identically distributed (IID) assumption has been used for so-called SNP-best linear unbiased predictor (SNP-BLUP). We calculated an SNP-SNP relationship matrix from a genomic relationship matrix (GRM) for best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) analysis. This usage is called SNP-genomic linear unbiased prediction (SNP-GBLUP). The prediction of SNP effects is the best feature of this BLUP. This fact can help BLUP scientists predict the genetic values of other sample groups. Also, through the SNP-SNP relationship matrix, scientists can view the SNP-SNP interaction via the covariance terms of that matrix.
We used the BLUP to estimate the numerical values of genetic factors that reside in an individual's DNA information. The expression of diverse and complicated genetic factors can lead to phenotypic quantitative values, and the genetic factors can translate into numerical values. SNPs can be the representatives of genetic factors. Therefore, the invisible but real SNP effects can be translated into numerical values.
BLUP, including best linear unbiased estimation (BLUE), is a standard method for predicting the random effects and fixed effects of a mixed model [6]. In general, random effects can be SNP effects, and fixed effects can be factors, such as sex. This method was originally designed in the field of animal breeding for estimating breeding values but is now applicable to many areas of research [6]. In particular, the advent of DNA sequencing technology has made it possible for the application of the BLUP-BLUE mixed model to predict SNP effects. The BLUP method, originally developed by Henderson, which is now applicable to animals, plants, and humans, uses statistical regression and exploits fixed effects as well as random effects. It is a general model that is able to find polygenic effects. In fact, polygenic effects are the replacement of quantitative trait loci (QTL) effects or randomly distributed genomewide effects. The mixed linear model, including BLUP and BLUE, is in the form: y = Xb + Zu + e, (1) where y is the vector of phenotypic values of given quantitative traits and b and u are vectors of fixed and random effects, respectively. X and Z are the design matrices. The random effects and residual error effects are assumed to have a normal distribution as u~MVN(0,Gu) and e~MVN(0,R), where MVN indicates a multivariate normal distribution and E(y) = Xb, cov(u, e') = 0. The general solution using the maximum likelihood (ML) method, which shows the effects of b and u, is in the form of: (2)
Here, Gu-1 is the inverse matrix of the variance-covariance matrix of random effects, which indicates the SNP-SNP variance-covariance matrix. The GRM, G, can be calculated using R package "rrBLUP." For the feasible and precise prediction of the breeding value of organisms, genome-wide studies are quickly becoming mainstream. SNP information can show us the precise and broad application of BLUP, because it is widely applicable, and hundreds of thousands of genetic markers (SNPs) can be tested for association with a phenotype [7].
We used three methods: GRM-based BLUP (G-BLUP), SNP-BLUP, and SNP-GBLUP. G-BLUP is a GRM-based method. SNP-BLUP is assumed to be IID between SNPs [8, 9]. SNP-GBLUP exploits the SNP-SNP relationship matrix. We found out the calculation method of the SNP-SNP variance covariance matrix using the GRM G [9, 10, 11]. The tabular method, to calculate the Gu matrix, developed by Fernando and Grossman [12], uses the IBD concept, which is complicated and vulnerable to incorrect calculations in organisms. There is no R package available in Gu matrix calculation (http://www.r-project.org). However, the G matrix can be calculated from R codes [12, 13]. We proposed a simple method for calculating the Gu matrix from the G matrix. The SNP-SNP relationship matrix means the variance-covariance matrix between SNPs.
Height in humans is a classical quantitative trait, is easy to measure, and has high heritability. The heritability of height has been estimated to be ~0.8 [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. We analyzed human height using the BLUP method. There were 997 individuals and 35,675 total SNPs in the analysis. Despite the use of many SNPs, we did not achieve satisfactory heritability results (about 30% of 0.8 total heritability). However, it was consistent with the results, which showed that 45% of height variance can be explained by considering all SNPs simultaneously.