In addition to careful analyses of clinical symptoms, numerous diagnostic methods have been used to diagnose cancer [1]. In particular, cancer is currently staged using various visual methods, such as radiography, computed tomography, bone scans, and positron emission tomography scans [1].
With the increasing amount of available data from visual images over recent years, numerous diagnostic techniques for cancer have been developed through machine learning methods such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2,3]. Moreover, methods for improving the performance of CNNs are being studied, and many models with effective architectures for classifying images have been developed [4]. In recent years, categorical classification models that predict cancer stages or types of cancer have been constructed on the basis of image data [4,5].
In addition to image data, basic classifications, such as a diagnosis of cancerous versus healthy tissue, can be performed through gene expression data, and models have been developed using traditional machine learning methods. However, AI-based deep neural networks (DNNs) can be developed using classification models with data matrices of continuous values such as expression data. Unlike image data, genomic data can be used as a proxy for the early diagnosis of cancer, meaning that models based on gene expression data can also be useful for identifying or predicting the diagnosis or progression of cancer and for providing timely and appropriate cancer treatment [6].
However, to construct a DNN model, a sufficient dataset is required [7]. Although data can be obtained individually, it is possible to secure a sufficiently large dataset to build a model through the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [8] and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [9].
In addition to furnishing genomic data, these sources also provide data indicating patients’ medical status, allowing us to examine the correlations between clinical variables and specific genomic data of interest [8,9].
Neuroblastoma is an extracranial solid tumor that most commonly occurs in childhood [10,11]. The specific traits of neuroblastoma include its early age of onset, a tendency for spontaneous regression of the tumor in infancy, and the high frequency of metastatic disease at diagnosis [10].
Neuroblastoma is staged using the International Neuroblastoma Staging System (INSS) [12]. This system classifies tumors in terms of their appearance upon an analysis of surgical biopsy findings, but this staging system alone cannot help doctors to determine a plan for neuroblastoma treatment, since it is dependent upon surgical biopsy findings and its results are obtained post-surgery [12,13].
However, as increasing amounts of data on neuroblastoma have become available, and suitable genomic data can be obtained from public databases (e.g., GEO and TCGA), it is now possible to explore whether a correlation exists between INSS stages and genomic traits such as the mutation profile or gene expression data [14].
In this study, in order to identify such correlations, we developed a simple DNN model using a data set of neuroblastoma patients including gene expression data and clinical data (i.e., INSS stages). We investigated whether our DNN model with gene expression data could classify the INSS stages.