APPLICATION NOTE
Genomics  &  Informatics
Vol.  9(2)  89-91,  June  2011

DOI:  10.5808/GI.2011.9.2.89
pISSN 1598-866X    eISSN 2234-0742

A  Clustering  Tool  Using  Particle  Swarm  Optimization  for  DNA 
Chip  Data

Xiaoyue  Han  and  Minsoo  Lee*

Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering, 
Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea

Abstract

DNA  chips  are  becoming  increasingly  popular  as  a  con-
venient  way  to  perform  vast  amounts  of  experiments  re-
lated  to  genes  on  a  single  chip.  And  the  importance  of 
analyzing  the  data  that  is  provided  by  such  DNA  chips 
is  becoming  significant.  A  very  important  analysis  on 
DNA  chip  data  would  be  clustering  genes  to  identify 
gene  groups  which  have  similar  properties  such  as 
cancer.  Clustering  data  for  DNA  chips  usually  deal  with 
a  large  search  space  and  has  a  very  fuzzy  charac-
teristic.  The  Particle  Swarm  Optimization  algorithm 
which  was  recently  proposed  is  a  very  good  candidate 
to  solve  such  problems.  In  this  paper,  we  propose  a 
clustering  mechanism  that  is  based  on  the  Particle 
Swarm  Optimization  algorithm.  Our  experiments  show 
that  the  PSO-based  clustering  algorithm  developed  is 
efficient  in  terms  of  execution  time  for  clustering  DNA 
chip  data,  and  thus  be  used  to  extract  valuable  in-
formation  such  as  cancer  related  genes  from  DNA  chip 
data  with  high  cluster  accuracy  and  in  a  timely  manner.

Availability:  The  codes  for  the  developed  algorithm  may 
be  obtained  from  the  author  under  consent  to  in-
tellectual  property  agreements.  The  code  is  a  demo  ver-
sion  and  thus  some  configuration  methods  are  done 
through  editing  configuration  files.  The  results  are  shown 
in  a  text  window  which  will  be  improved  in  the  future. 
Contact  mlee@ewha.ac.kr  if  you  are  interested  in  the 
demo  version  of  the  codes  for  possible  collaboration.

Keywords:  clustering,  DNA  chip  data

Introduction

Recent  advances  in  biological  science  are  creating  a 
revolutionary  opportunity  for  understanding  genome  se-
quences  for  many  different  organisms.  Such  organisms 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  mlee@ehwa.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-3401,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  29  May  2011

that 

imitate 

from  using  algorithms 

are  complex  and  genomes  can  be  immense,and  thus 
new  and  powerful  technologies  are  being  developed  to 
analyze  large  numbers  of  genes  and  proteins  as  a  com-
plement  to  traditional  methodologies  that  study  a  small 
number  at  a  time.  The  recently  developed  DNA  chips,  in 
other  words  DNA  microarrays,  have  emerged  as  a  prime 
candidate  for  such  high  performance  analysis  methods 
(Debouck  et al.,  1999;  DeRisi  et al.,  1997).
    The  clustering  algorithms  for  DNA  chip  data  could 
benefit 
the 
ecosystem.  Algorithms  that  imitate  the  ecosystem  have 
the  following  benefits.  First,  they  provide  a  solution 
based  on  a  solid  statistical  model.  In  other  words,  they 
do  not  rely  on  a  single  solution  but  have  more  flexibility 
due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  based  on  a  statistical 
method  that  considers  several  solutions  at  one  time. 
This  allows  the  algorithm  to  find  good  solutions  that 
may  be  missed  by  other  algorithms.  Second,  algorithms 
that  imitate  the  ecosystem  make  use  of  the  interaction 
among  the  possible  solutions.  For  example,  the  genetic 
algorithm  allows  solutions  to  pair  together  and  creates 
new  solutions.  Third,  these  algorithms  allow  exceptions. 
Therefore,  solutions  that  are  not  typical  but  are  actually 
better  solutions  can  be  found.  Because  of  these  rea-
sons,  the  algorithms  are  suitable  to  solve  the  complex 
problem  of  analyzing  mass  amounts  of  complex  bio-
logical  data.

Related  Research

Clustering  is  the  process  of  grouping  together  similar 
entities.  Clustering  is  appropriate  when  there  is  no  a  pri-
ori  knowledge  about  the  data.  In  such  circumstances, 
the  only  possible  approach  is  to  study  the  similarity  be-
tween  different  samples  or  experiments.  There  are  many 
existing  clustering  algorithms:  hierarchical  clustering, 
self-organizing  maps,  K-means  clustering  and  many 
others. 
    Because  of  the  characteristics  of  the  DNA  chip  data 
such  as  the  high  complexity,  large  in  amount,  and 
changeable  property,  we  propose  a  clustering  algorithm 
which  uses  an  algorithm  that  imitates  the  ecosystem.

Particle  Swarm  Optimization

    The  Particle  Swarm  Optimization  (PSO)  algorithm  (Par-
sopoulos  et al.,  2002)  that  our  system  uses  is  a  sto-
chastic,  population-based  computer  problem-solving 

90    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(2)  89-91,  June  2011

algorithm.  It  is  a  kind  of  swarm  intelligence  that  is 
based  on  social-psychological  principles  and  provides 
insights  into  social  behavior,  as  well  as  contributing  to 
engineering  applications.  The  swarm  is  typically  mod-
eled  by  particles  in  multidimensional  space  that  have  a 
position  and  a  velocity.  These  particles  fly  through  mul-
tidimensional  space  and  have  two  essential  reasoning 
capabilities.  They  are  their  memory  of  their  own  best 
position  and  knowledge  of  their  neighborhood's  best 
position.  Here,  the  term  "best"  simply  means  the  posi-
tion  with  the  smallest  objective  value.  Members  of  a 
swarm  communicate  good  positions  to  each  other  and 
adjust  their  own  position  and  velocity  based  on  these 
good  positions.  There  are  two  main  ways  this  communi-
cation  is  done.  One  is  a  global  best  that  is  known  to 
all  and  immediately  updated  when  a  new  best  position 
is  found  by  any  particle  in  the  swarm.  The  other  is  the 
"Neighborhood"  bests  where  each  particle  only  immedi-
ately  communicates  with  a  subset  of  the  swarm  about 
best  positions.  Suppose  that  the  search  space  is D-di-
mensional,  then  the  i-th  particle  of  the  swarm  can  be 
represented  by  a  D-dimensional  vector,  Xi  =  (xi1, xi2, 
.  .  .  , xiD).  The  velocity  (position  change)  of  this  particle, 
can  be  represented  by  another  D-dimensional  vector Vi 
=  (vi1, vi2,  .  .  .  , viD).  The  best  previously  visited  posi-
tion  of  the  i-th  particle  is  denoted  as Pi  =  (pi1, pi2,  . 
.  .  ,  piD).  Defining  g  as  the  index  of  the  best  particle 
in  the  swarm,  the  PSO  equation  is  the  following. 
x
n
id

cr

p

x

n
id

1

n
+
id

p

n
id

)

+

n
2

(

n
1

(

=

n

id

−

n

gd

−

+

)

v
x

v
x

cr
v

1

n
+
id

1

n
+
id

=

n
id

+

Where  d  =  1,  2,  .  .  .,  D,  i  =  1,  2,  .  .  .  ,  N,  and  N  is 
the  size  of  the  swarm,c  is  a  positive  constant,  r1,  r2 
are  random  numbers,  uniformly  distributed  in  [0,  1],  and 
n  =  1,  2,  .  .  .,  determines  the  iteration  number.

DNA  Chip  Analysis  System

DNA  chips,  in  other  words  microarrays,  are  a  tool  for 
gene  expression  analysis.  The  DNA  chip  consists  of  the 
probe  which  is  a  single  strand  DNA  printed  on  the  solid 
substrate.  The  types  of  the  chip  or  the  name  of  the  chip 
depends  on  the  method  of  the  chip  fabrication.  The  idea 
behind  the  DNA  chip  is  that  the  DNA  in  the  solution  that 
contains  sequences  complementary  to  the  sequences  of 
the  DNA  deposited  on  the  surface  of  the  array  will  be 
hybridized  to  those  complementary  sequences.  Usually, 
this  interrogation  is  done  by  washing  the  array  with  a 
solution  containing  DNA,  called  a  target.  To  analyze  the 
DNA  chip,  overviews  of  the  steps  that  must  be  gone 
through  are  as  follows.  First,  the  researchers  perform 
experiments  using  DNA  chips.  Afterwards  the  DNA  anal-

ysis  process  is  carried  out  by  first  scanning  the  results 
of  the  experiments.  Next,  quality  control  and  normal-
ization  processes  are  carried  out  to  revise  errors.  During 
this  step,  a  lot  of  data  is  filtered  and  the  quantity  of  the 
test  data  decreases.  And  then  feature  selection  that  se-
lects  specific  parts  is  performed.  The  next  step  is  the 
data  mining  work  such  as  classification  and  clustering. 
Finally,  the  results  are  stored  in  the  biological  data 
warehouse  and  the  warehouse  system  provides  analysis 
results  of  integrated  biological  information  to  users.
　Our  tool  focuses  on  the  clustering  process.  Clustering 
is  similar  to  classification  in  that  data  is  being  grouped. 
However,  unlike  classification, 
the  groups  are  not 
predefined.  Instead,  the  grouping  is  accomplished  by 
finding  similarities  between  data  according  to  character-
istics  found  in  the  actual  data.  The  groups  are  called 
clusters.  Clustering  is  appropriate  when  there  is  no  a 
priori  knowledge  about  the  data.  In  such  circumstances, 
the  only  possible  approach  is  to  study  the  similarity  be-
tween  different  samples  or  experiments.  Similarity  is 
measured  in  many  different  ways,  and  the  final  result  of 
the  clustering  depends  on  the  formula  used. 

PSO  based  clustering 

through 

Our  clustering  algorithm  is  based  on  the  Particle  swarm 
optimization  (PSO),  which  is  a  population-based  sto-
chastic  search  process,  modeled  after  the  social  behav-
ior  of  a  bird  flock.
    To  perform  clustering  using  the  PSO-based  Clustering 
System,  the  user  needs  to  access  the  DNA  chip  data. 
In  our  system,  the  DNA  chip  data  is  stored  in  the  data-
base  after  going 
the  quality  control  and 
normalization.  During  the  input  stage,  the  system  con-
nects  to  the  database  and  brings  portions  of  the  nor-
malized  biological  data  into  the  system  memory.  The 
next  step  is  running  the  PSO  clustering  algorithm.  In  this 
step,  the  system  initializes  particles  for  each  gene  and 
then  maps  the  particle  and  velocity.  In  order  to  decide 
the  cluster  number  for  each  gene,  the  system  calculates 
the  fitness  function.  This  work  is  done  for  all  particles, 
and  the  system  is  updated  with  the  global  best  value 
and  local  best  values.  And  then  the  centroids  of  the 
clusters  are  updated.  A  cluster  number  for  each  gene  is 
assigned  by  considering  the  fitness  function  value  which 
is  designed  by  the  user.  The  last  step  is  displaying  the 
results.  The  system  displays  information  such  as  the 
number  of  genes,  the  number  of  samples,  iteration 
count,  and  the  cluster  number  for  each  gene  and  so  on. 
The  overall  system  flow  is  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

PSO  Clustering  Tool  for  DNA  Chip  Data    91

Fig.  3.  PSO  vs.  K-means  clustering  execution  time  com-
parison.

Swarm  Optimization  algorithm  has  been  designed  and 
implemented.  The  PSO  algorithm  uses  a  form  of  swarm 
intelligence.  Clustering  is  accomplished  by  encoding 
particles  to  represent  clustering  results  of  the  genes. 
Fitness  functions  are  designed  to  calculate  cluster  dis-
tances  via  centroids.  The  implemented  DNA  chip  system 
effectively  clusters  the  data  as  verified  by  the  experi-
ments.  In  the  future,  we  will  optimize  the  algorithm  to 
improve  on  the  accuracy  and  execution  speed.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  Mid-career  Researcher 
Program  through  NRF  grant  funded  by  the  MEST  (No. 
2009-0083992). 
References

Debouck,  C.,  and  Goodfellow,  P.N.  (1999).  DNA  microarrays 
in  drug  discovery  and  development.  Nat.  Genet.  21, 
48-50.

DeRisi,  J.L.,  Iver,  V.R.,  and  Brown,  P.O.  (1997).  Exploring 
the  metabolic  and  genetic  control  of  gene  expression  on 
a  genomic  scale.  Science  278,  680-686.

Parsopoulos,  K.E.  and  Vrahatis,  M.N.  (2002).  Recent  ap-
proaches  to  global  optimization  problems  through  Particle 
Swarm  Optimization.  Nat Comput.  1,  235-306.

Yuqing,  P.,  Xiangdan,  H.,  and  Shang,  L. 

(2003).  The 
K-means  Clustering  Algorithm  based  on  Density  and  Ant 
colony.  In  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  Int.  Conf.  Neural 
Networks  &  Signal  Processing,  December  14-17,  Nanjing, 
China.

Fig.  1.  Flow  of  PSO-based  clustering  system.

Fig.  2.  Cluster  formation  while  running  PSO-based  cluster-
ing  system.

Implementation  &  Experimental  Results

The  displayed  results  for  the  PSO-based  Clustering 
System  show  the  cluster  and  corresponding  genes.  The 
algorithm  running  is  shown  in  Fig.  2.
    We  used  the  AB  1700  mouse  chip  (1-  dye)  which  was 
provided  from  Macrogen  Inc.  We  experimented  with  a 
test  data  set  of  10  to  100  genes  and  24  samples.  We 
performed  a  comparison  of  the  execution  time  with  the 
K-means  algorithm  (Yuqing et al.,  2003)  and  show  that 
it  has  superior  performance.  The  performance  results  are 
shown  in  Fig.  3.

Conclusion

A  DNA  chip  clustering  system  based  on  the  Particle 

