APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  168-170  September  2009

A  Computer-aided  Design  Tool  with  Semiautomatic 
Image-Processing  Features  for  Visualizing  Biological 
Pathways

Overview  of  the  System

CAD  (Computer-Aided  Design)  has  been  traditionally 
used  to  assist  in  modeling  in  various  fields,  and  ad-
vances  in  the  biological  community  have  created  new 
uses  for  CAD  with  many  novel  biomedical  applications 
(Demir et al.,  2002;  Holford et al.,  2005;  Sorokin et al., 
2006;  Sun,  2005).  Especially,  CAD  can  be  a  visualization 
gateway  to  gather  numerous  biological  pathway  re-
sources,  not  only  from  biological  pathway  databases  but 
also  from  static  images  and  research  articles.
    The  PPE  (Pyrus  Pathway  Editor)  system,  a  Java- 
based  visual  tool  for  drawing  and  annotating  biological 
pathways,  is  described  in  this  paper.  It  is  a  graphical 
editor  for  biological  pathways,  and  it  integrates  the 
pathway  image  and  XML  file  source.  Fig.  1  shows  a 
snapshot  of  the  PPE  system.
    The  PPE  window  contains  a  menu  bar,  tool  bar,  sta-
tus  bar,  and  a  progress  bar  at  the  top  of  the  screen. 
Windows  can  be  dragged  around  the  screen  and 
resized.  The  tool  bar  contains  tools  for  making  se-
lections,  for  zooming  and  scrolling  images,  and  for 
changing  the  drawing  color.  The  status  bar,  when  the 
cursor  is  over  an  image,  displays  pixel  coordinates  and 
values.  The  progress  bar  shows  the  progress  of  time- 
consuming  operations.  PPE  provides  several  common 
visual  notations  but  also  allows  the  user  to  define  his 
own  notations.  The  shape  menu  in  the  left  window,  in 

Sung-Il  Ham2,  San-Duk  Yang1,  Chin-Ting  Thong1 
and  Hyun-Seok  Park1,2*

1Department  of  Computer  Science,  Ewha  Womans  Uni-
versity,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea,  2Department  of  Architec-
tural  Engineering,  Yonsei  University,  Seoul  120-749, 
Korea

Abstract

The  explosion  in  biological  data  resulting  from  high- 
throughput  experiments  requires  new  software  tools  to 
manipulate  and  display  pathways  in  a  way  that  can  in-
tegrate  disparate  sources  of 
information.  A  visual 
Java-based  CAD  tool  for  drawing  and  annotating  bio-
logical  pathways  with  semiautomatic  image-processing 
features  is  described  in  this  paper.  The  result  of  the  im-
age-editing  process  is  an  XML  file  for  the  appropriate 
links.  This  tool  integrates  the  pathway  images  and  XML 
file  sources.  The  system  has  facilities  for  linking  graph-
ical  objects  to  external  databases  and  is  capable  of  re-
producing  existing  visual  representations  of  pathway 
maps.

Availability:  PPE  has  been  implemented  using  Java  and 
relies  on  Open  Source  Software;  it  includes  some  ex-
ternal  image-processing  modules,  imported  from  ImageJ 
(http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).  The  system  is  only  a  pre-al-
pha  release  and  needs  to  be  improved  with  a  user  inter-
face  to  be  fully  automated.  You  may  download  a  demo 
version  of  an  executable  file  (ppe1.0_executable.jar_ 
all_os.zip)  from  Sourceforge.net  (http://www.sourceforge. 
net/projects/j2dpathway).  However,  some  of  the  ImageJ 
modules  are  excluded  in  the  demo  version.  Contact 
neo@ewha.ac.kr  or  archispace@yonsei.ac.kr  if  you  are 
interested  in  the  full  version  of  the  system  or  the  source 
code  for  possible  collaboration.

Keywords:  bioinformatics,  computer-aided  design,  meta-
bolic  pathway  visualization,  systems  biology

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  10  August  2009

Fig.  1.  Snapshot  of  the  PPE  System  (Mode  1):  PPE  sup-
ports  most  standard  image-processing  functions,  such  as 
contrast  manipulation  and  smoothing.  It  does  geometric 
transformations,  such  as  scaling  and  rotation.  Images  can 
be  zoomed.

A  CAD  Tool  for  Biological  Pathways  with  Image-Processing  Features    169

      (a)  User  clicks  on  each  node  to  set  up  the  node  type.
Fig.  2.  Semiautomatic  Image  Processing  of  Biological  Pathways  (Mode  2):  This  exemplary  image  source  is  from  BioCARTA 
(http://www.biocarta.com). 

(b)  User  manually  clicks  on  nodes  and  connects  each  node.

Fig.  1,  can  be  used  to  select  the  shapes  of  the  bio-
logical  nodes.  Users  can  annotate  map  elements  with 
biological  information  or  link  them  to  external  databases. 
The  File/Import  submenu  provides  access  to  plug-ins  for 
reading  XML  files  and  for  loading  images.  Thus,  maps 
can  be  drawn  in  several  modes.
    First,  they  can  be  imported  from  external  XML  file 
sources  and  laid  out  in  the  editor  window,  as  in  Fig.  1. 
In  the  case  that  layout  information  is  not  provided  in  the 
XML  file,  an  automatic  layout  module  will  be  applied  to 
display  biological  pathways.
    Second,  it  allows  a  user  to  import  external  image 
sources,  process  the  image,  convert  the  processed  im-
age  into  an  XML  format,  and  finally  generate  maps  in 
the  editor  window.  The  File/Open  command  opens  TIFF, 
GIF,  and  JPEG  images.  There  are  some  excellent  image 
sources,  ranging  from  image  pathway  databases,  such 
as  KEGG  (http://www.kegg.org/)  and  BioCARTA  (http:// 
www.biocarta.com),  to  images  in  numerous  biological 
textbooks,  research  papers,  and  websites.  These  ex-
ternal  images  are  initially  displayed  in  additional  win-
dows  below  the  main  editing  window,  as  in  Fig.  2a. 
They  will  be  semiautomatically  processed,  converted  in-
to  an  XML  format,  and  displayed  in  the  main  editing 
window,  as  in  Fig.  2b.  Each  node  and  edge  in  the  origi-
nal  image  has  to  be  confirmed  by  a  user,  one  by  one; 
double-clicking  on  any  line  or  image  nodes  in  the  bot-
tom  window  will  result  in  the  Object  in  the  editor 

window.  By  selecting  an  appropriate  node  type  from  the 
pop-up  window,  the  user  can  create  a  new  object  in  the 
main  window.  The  types  and  shapes  of  nodes  are 
predefined.  The  node  types  include  protein-node,  chem-
ical  compound-node,  DNA-node,  RNA-node,  enzyme- 
node,  and  others.  In  addition,  users  can  define  their 
own  node  type.  By  selecting  the  exact  concept  from  the 
pop-up  menu,  the  user  can  specify  an    appropriate 
edge  type,  too.

Discussion  and  Future  Direction

KEGG  and  BioCARTA  visualize  pathways  in  a  static 
way.  Pathway  diagrams  are  manually  drawn  and  stored 
as  bitmap  image  files.  While  this  visualization  style  of-
fers  good  pathway  representation,  it  does  not  provide 
the  facilities  to  create  and  visualize  dynamic  pathways. 
Fortunately,  KEGG  also  provides  XML  files.  In  the  case 
that  layout  information  is  not  provided  in  the  XML  file, 
an  automatic  layout  module  will  be  applied  to  display 
biological  pathways.  However,  there  are  cases  in  which 
XML  files  are  not  provided  in  many  other  databases.  In 
this  case,  we  have  to  convert  an  image  file  directly  to 
an  XML  file.
    In  this  paper,  a  computer-aided  approach  to  modify 
biological  pathways,  both  in  image  and  XML  file  format, 
is  presented.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  we  have 
not  found  any  attempt  to  process  biological  pathway 

170    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  168-170,  September  2009

human  intervention,  can  be  fully  automated  in  the  ma-
jority  of  cases.

References

Abramoff,  M.D.,  Magelhaes,  P.J.,  and  Ram,  S.J.  (2004). 
Image  processing  with  image.  J. Biophotonics Internatio-
nal 11,  36-42.

Demir,  E.,  Babur,  O.,  Dogrusoz,  U.,  Gursoy,  A.,  Nisanci,  G., 
Cetin-Atalay,  R.,  and  Ozturk,  M.  (2002).  PATIKA:  an  inte-
grated  visual  environment  for  collaborative  construction 
and  analysis  of  cellular  pathways.  Bioinform.  18,  996- 
1003.

Holford,  M.,  Li,  N.,  Nadkarni,  P.,  and  Zhao,  H.  (2005).  Vita-
Pad:  visualization  tools  for  the  analysis  of  pathway  data. 
Bioinform.  21,  1596-1602.

Sorokin,  A.,  Pally,  K.,  Selkov,  A.,  Derain,  O.V.,  Dronov,  S., 
Ghazal,  P.,  and  Goryanin,  I.  (2006).  The  pathway  editor: 
a  tool  for  managing  complex  biological  networks. 
IBM J. Res. Dev.  50,  561-573.

Sun,  W.  (2005).  Bio-CAD. Computer-Aided Design  37,  1095- 

1096.

            (a)  Original  Image
Fig.  3.  Filtering  Out  Characters  in  the  Image.  We  borrowed 
part  of  the  modules  from  ImageJ  (Abramoff  et al.,  2004).

      (b)  Filtered-out  Image

images  within  the  CAD  environment.  However,  there  are 
some  thorny  issues  that  need  to  be  solved  to  fully  auto-
mate  this  process.  Especially,  an  optical  character  rec-
ognition  module  should  be  added  in  the  future  to  recog-
nize  characters  in  the  image.  Currently,  the  characters  in 
the  original  images  are  filtered  out,  and  the  names  and 
types  of  each  node  are  manually  annotated  by  humans 
in  a  later  process,  as  in  Fig.  3.  Once  the  characters  can 
be  recognized,  the  naming  process  of  each  node,  by 

