Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  4(1) 40-44,  March 2006 

XPERNATO-TOX: an Integrated Toxicogenomics 
Knowledge base 

Jung Hoon Woo1
Ju Han Kim1.4* 

,  Hyeouneui Kinf, Gu Kong3  and 

1Seoul  National  University  Biomedical  Informatics  (SNUBI) 
and  4Human  Genome  Research  Institute,  Seoul  National 
University  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  11 0-799,  Korea 
2Graduate  Program  in  Health  Informatics,  University  of 
Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  MN  55455,  USA 
3Department  of  Pathology,  College  of  Medicine  and 
Molecular  Biomarker  Research  Center,  Hanyang  University, 
Seoul  133-791 ,  Korea 

Summary 
Toxicogenomics combines transcriptome,  proteome and 
metabolome  profiling  with  conventional  toxicology  to 
investigate the  interaction  between  biological  molecules 
and toxicant or environmental  stress  in  disease caution. 
Toxicogenomics  faces the problems  of comparison  and 
integration  across  different  sources  of  data.  Cause  of 
unusual characteristics of toxicogenomic data, researcher 
should  be  assisted  by  data  analysis  and  annotation  for 
getting meaningful information. There are already existing 
repositories  which  claim  to  stand  for  toxicogenomics 
database. However, those just contain limited abilities for 
toxicogenomic research.  For supporting toxicologist who 
comes  up  against  toxicogenomic  data  flood,  now  we 
propose  novel  toxicogenomics  knowledgebase  system, 
XPERANTQ-TOX.  XPERANTQ-TOX  is  an  integrated 
system for toxicogenomic data management and analysis. 
It is composed of three distinct but closely connected parts. 
Firstly,  Data Storage System is for reposit many kinds of 
'-omics' data and conventional toxicology data. Secondly, 
Data Analysis System consists of analytical  modules for 
integrated toxicogenomics data.  At  last,  Data Annotation 
System is for giving extensive insight of data to researcher. 

Keywords:  toxicogenomics, data comparison, integration, 
analysis,  annotation,  knowledgebase 

Introduction 
Toxicology is study to understand the relationship between 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail juhan@snu.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-740-8320,  Fax +82-2-742-5947 
Accepted  3 March 2006 

toxicants,  and  human  disease  susceptibility.  A  critical 
part of this  study is the characterization  of the adverse 
effects at the level  of the organism, the tissue,  the cell, 
and the  molecular makeup of the cell.  Thus,  studies  in 
toxicology  measure  effects  on  body  weight  and  food 
consumption of an organism, on individual organ weights, 
on  microscopic  histopathology  of  tissues,  and  on  cell 
viability,  necrosis, and apoptosis (Waters eta/., 2004). 
Recently,  cause  of  the  appearance  of  new  '-omics' 
technology, toxicologist could get the extensive information 
of molecular level  (Hamadeh et at.,  2003). That is,  'new 
-omics technology', such as transcriptomics, proteomics 
and  metabolomics  have  been  developed,  therefore 
toxicologist  can  measure  thousands  of  movement  of 
transcriptome  or  proteome  (Aardema  et  at.,  2002). 
Obviously,  variations at cellular and organism  level are 
caused by critical changes of mRNAs or proteins. So the 
application of new technologies to conventional toxicology 
gives insight into 'cause and effect chain' of organism. 

As mentioned of changes of toxicology, the new term 
Toxicogenomics  has  been  evolved.  Toxicogenomics 
could  be  demonstrated  of  integration  of  conventional 

Overview Of 
Toxicogenomics 

}? £ -Model animal 

EJ} Clinical chemistry, 
0'- r 

Histopathology, 

Physiology, etc. 

~ Conventional 

Toxicology data 

Integrated 

Toxicogenomics 
Knowledge base 

High throughput data 
- Transcriptomics 
- Proteomirs 
- Metabolomics 
·ArrayCGH 
-Tissue microarray 

1-omics' technology data 

Fig.  1. The overview of toxicogenomics 
From  model  animal,  data flow of clockwise rotation  indicates 
data  gathering  with  '-new  omics'  technology.  Opposite  flow 
indicates  data  gathering  in conventional  toxicology.  Data 
Analysis  represented  on  bottom  left  of  the  figure  reduce 
numerous  but  unfocused  genomic  data  into  significant  one. 
Data Annotation represented on bottom right. Analysts easily 
get insight from toxicogenomic data which are just an array of 
numbers and tiny indices. Arrows mean the data flow. 

XPERNATO-TOX: an Integrated Toxicogenomics Knowledgebase  41 

Table 1.  Existing toxicogenomics repositories. 

Database 

Array Track 

CEBS 

TOX · MAIMExpress 

CTD 

dbZach 
EDGE 

'-omics' data 

(transcriptomics) 

Conventional data 
(histopathology) 

Analysis System 

Other knowledge For annotation 

Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 
Included 

Not included 
Not included 
Not included 
Not included 
Not included 
Not included 

Included (low level) 
Included (low level) 

Not included 
Not included 
Not included 
Not included 

Gene library, toxicant library 

Not included 
Not included 

Gene-Chemical Cross reference 

Included 

Not included 

toxicology and '-omics' technologies. To study of combining 
genomic changes and biological endpoints, collection of 
heterogeneous data has become challenge of toxicogenornics 
(Mattes et at.,  2004). 

Fig.  1 shows the overview of current toxicogenomics. 
From  model  animal,  data  flow  of  clockwise  rotation 
indicates  data  gathering  with  '-new  omics'  technology. 
There  are  proteomics,  transcriptomics,  metabolomics, 
arrayCGH,  and  tissue  microarray which  generate high(cid:173)
throughput expression data (Waters et at., 2003). Opposite 
flow indicates data gathering in conventional toxicology. 
There could be histopathology, clinical chemistry, physiology 
and so on (Laura et at.,  2004). Those two processes yield 
heterogeneous  data that  cannot  be  combined  easily,  so 
well-designed knowledgebase which is able to store such 
types of data has been needed. Data Analysis represented 
on bottom left of the Fig. 1 reduce enormous but unfocused 
genomic data to significant one by several statistical and 
computational  modules.  Then  analyzed  data  become 
small enough to handle. But in general, it is still too huge 
to be  interpreted.  Data Annotation  is also  important for 
that reason.  Analysts easily get meaningful  information 
from  toxicogenomic  data composed  of just an  array of 
numbers and tiny indices. 

Currently, there are several repositories which clairn to 
stand for 'Toxicogenomics database (or knowledgebase)' 
(Mattes et at., 2004). However, they are still not enough to 
stand for toxicogenomics knowledgebase {Table 1 ).  Most 
listed  databases  are  not  able  to  include  conventional 
toxicology. Even though there are databases have analysis 
system,  they  perform  only  lower level  analysis  just  as 
'simple  t-test'.  For  getting  enough  insight  from  high(cid:173)
throughput data, it should be able to perform higher level 
analysis. In addition, extra data for annotate primary one 
still  insufficient  in  most  cases.  Therefore  the  actual 
circumstances, toxicologist cannot gather enough resources 
from existing repositories. 

In this paper, we propose a novel system 'XPERANTO(cid:173)

TOX' to complement limitation of existing toxicogenomics 
repositories. 

Methods 
Design 'Data Storage System' using pre-existing 
data models 
MIAME-TOX (http://www.mged.org) and TMA-OM  (Lee 
et at.,  2005)  were  used  as  data  standard  for  storage 
system.  MIAME-TOX is an  extended version of MIAME 
(Minimum Information About an Microarray Experiment). 
That is, MIAME-TOX is a guideline defining the minimum 
information  required  to  interpret  unambiguously  and 
potentially reproduce and verify array-based toxicogenomic 
experiments. TMA-OM (Tissue Microarray- Object Model) 
is a data model for capturing tissue microarray experimental 
data and representing clinical and histopathology information 
of  tissues.  Otherwise  there  are  no  gold  standard  for 
conventional toxicology data, such as histopathology image 
and  description.  So  we  referenced  sample  description 
part of two mentioned data model. 

Construct 'Data Analysis System' with statistical 
modules 
There  are  several  steps 
for  getting  meaningful 
information from high-dimensional data. Data analysis 
system  in  XPERANTO-TOX  has  been  developed 
based on these steps.  Statistical language R (current 
version  R  2.2)  was  used  for  materializing  most 
modules in analysis system. VSN (variance stabilizing 
transformation) (Huber et at.,  2002),  KNN  (K Nearest 
Neighbor),  cyclic  lowess,  global  lowess  and  several 
baseline  normalization  algorithms  (Bolstard  et  at., 
2003)  were  used 
for  data  preprocessing  step. 
Significant  Analysis  for  Microarrays  (Virginia  et at., 
2001 ),  cyberT (Baldi  et at.,  2001 ),  DEDS (Differential 
Expression via Distance Summary of Multiple Statistics 
Description)  (Yee  et at.,  2005),  ANOVA (Analysis Of 
Variance),  bayesANOVA  (Baldi  et at.,  2001),  GSEA 
(Gene  Set  Enrichment  Study)  (Aravind  et at.,  2005) 
and  other  algorithms  were  used  for  significant  data 
analysis  step.  Hierarchical,  K-means,  SOM  (Self 
Organizing Map), PCA (Principle Component Analysis), 
ICA (Independent Component Analysis) (Samir et at., 

42  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 4(1) 40-44,  March 2006 

2004) algorithms were used for clustering data elements. 
At last,  SVM (Support Vector Machine) (Brown  et at., 
2000)  and  PAM  (Prediction  Analysis  of  Microarray) 
(Robert et at.,  2002) were used for classification. 

Localize  public  databases  for  organizing  'Data 
Annotation System' 
We localized GenBank (http:/1\MMV.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/ 
index.html), UniGene (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?db=unigene),  Entrez  Gene  (http://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene),  SWISSPROT 
(http://www.expasy.org/sprotl) databases for composing 
'Gene'  part  in  annotation  system.  CTD  (Comparative 
Toxicogenomic Database) (Carolyn et at., 2003), Array Track 
(Wieda  et at.,  2003)  were  localized  for  'Toxicant'  part. 
'Disease' part was composed of OMIM (http://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM),  MeSH  term 
data.  For connecting each part,  we referenced  CTD for 
gene-toxicant,  PathMeSH  for  gene-disease  and  CHE 
(http://database.healthandenvironment.org/) for toxicant(cid:173)
disease connection. 

Results 
XPERANTO-TOX  is  developed  as  a  large  system 
composed of closely connected three sub systems (Fig. 

XPERANTO-TOX 

Data Storage System 

Conn·ntional toxicology data 

llistopathological Finding 
-Image 
- Jk,crlptlon 

New- omics dnt.a 

- DNi\ mkroarray 
(transcriptomics) 

Analysis modules 

-Data preprocessing 
- Identification or 
significant genes 

- Exploratory duta analy~l!. 
- Classification 
-Etc. 

Gene 

/ 

Toxicant  -

Disea-,e 

Fig. 2. The composition of whole system,  XPERNATD-TOX 
XPERANTD-TOX is composed of three subsystems. They are 
'Data  Storage  System',  'Data  Analysis  System'  and  'Data 
Annotation System'. Many kinds of heterogeneous generated 
from  toxicogenomic  data  stream  could  be  stored  'Data 
Storage System'. Stored data could be effectively analyzed by 
'Data Analysis System'. Data within XPRANTD-TOX could be 
explained or annotated  by 'Data Annotation  System'. Arrows 
between systems mean 'reference' 

2).  First is data storage system.  It could be able to store 
histopathology  data  (image,  description)  and  array 
based high throughput data. Second is higher level data 
analysis system.  It directly connected with data storage 
system,  so  that  analyst  easily  get  enough  information 
explained  high  dimensional  '-omics'  data.  Last  one  is 
data  annotation  system  which  is  connected  with  both 
storage and analysis system. Therefore if any researcher 
wants  to  get  biological  interpretations  for  stored  or 
analyzed data, annotation system could be quite useful. 

Data Storage System 
Researcher could reposit heterogeneous data generated 
from  various  types  of  experiments.  The  system  is 
designed  with  MIAME-TOX  for  storing  data  which  is 
produced  by  array-based  experiments  such  as  DNA 
microarray, arrayCGH and so on. Currently, toxicogenomic 
research has included 'tissue microarray' experiment for 
efficient confirmation for '-omics' data.  For instance, the 
differentially expressed gene sets derived by microarray 
data analysis could be easily certified by tissue microarray. 
Conventional  toxicology  data  would  be  included  in 
database.  For 
image  and 
description  could  be  stored  in  XPERANTO-TOX  with 
own  data model.  Finally,  XPERANTO-TOX could  store 
heterogeneous  array  based  high-throughput  data,  and 
conventional toxicology data.  In addition, this repository 
would  serve  as  a  resource  for  discovery  expression 
patterns of distinct molecules and comparison between 
the  patterns.  Simple and  advanced query forms will  be 
available to retrieve information about molecular profiling, 
including  nucleotide  and  protein  sequences  as well  as 
copy numbers of DNA fragments and metabolites. 

instance  histopathology 

Data Analysis System 
Researchers have applied tens of classical and modified 
statistical modules for analyzing high-dimensional toxicog 
enomics data.  No one knows about exact population of 
biological variables. Therefore several algorithms still have 
been developed in this area. We determined considerably 
generalized process for analyzing DNA microarray data, 
for instance. 

Basically, goal of DNA microarray experiment (-explain 
thousands of transcripts' changes with specific condition) 
is  finding  differentially expressed  gene  sets.  First step 
for  this  goal  is  data  preprocessing  through  filtering, 
transformation, imputation and normalization. Input data 
should  be  filtered  by  determined  standard  (-generally 
commercial arrays have recommended filtering standard) 
or by flexible decision. Filtered data could be transformed 
by  log2  or  vsn  module.  Missing  values  generated  by 

XPERNATO-TOX: an Integrated Toxicogenomics Knowledgebase  43 

previous  steps  are  estimated  with  KNN 
imputation 
module.  For  normalization,  cyclic  lowess,  global  lowess, 
quantile and baseline normalization modules are available. 
After that,  scoring statistics would  be applied.  Because 
selecting  differentially expressed  genes through  distinct 
conditions  is  most  significant  parts  among  the  whole 
process, numerous algorithms have been emerged. We 
materialized SAM, cyberT, simplet-test, DEDS, ANOVA, 
bayesANOVA, and so on as statistical scoring modules. 
In  most  cases,  selected  genes  are  still  too  many  to 
interpret  individually.  For  that  reason,  clustering  has 
become  essential  in  this  field.  Hierarchical,  K-means, 
SOM,  PCA,  and 
ICA  algorithms  are  available  for 
clustering in this system.  In addition, SVM and PAM also 
could be implemented for classification. Gene has become 
more important as a classifier for prognosis  in  medical 
fields,  therefore  analysis  system  in  XPERANTO-TOX 
would be very useful for classification analysis with DI\JA 
microarray data. 

Actually, there is no gold standard for analysis.  Each 
algorithm  has  been  shown  different  performance  in 
different experiment. So we designed flexible system for 
extension. If new algorithm would be emerged, XPERANTO(cid:173)
TOX could easily attach new analysis modules. 

Data Annotation System 
Such as histopathology data from conventional toxicology 
could  be  directly  interpreted.  Since  the  data  is  just  a 
single  image or description,  researchers can  recognize 
what  it  is  and  what  it  means.  On  the  other  hands, 
toxicogenomic data possess the characteristics of high 
dimension so,  without annotation for stored or analyzed 
data,  analyst  would  be  in  trouble  with  data  flood.  For 
example,  general  DNA microarray data matrix consists 
of myriads row and several tens of columns and the data 
matrix is just filled  with  numbers.  Without an  assistant, 
toxicologist fall  into confusion  with  those  kinds  of  data, 
so there should be suitable annotation system to make 
the data interpretably. 

There are three data types in annotation system (Fig. 
2}.  They  are  gene,  toxicant  and  disease.  Those  data 
types are cross-referenced. Researcher can query about 
affected genes by specific toxicant or disease. Query for 
opposite  direction  also  be  possible.  When  researchers 
get differentially  expressed  genes  by  specific toxicant, 
they could be confirmed with above mentioned queries. 
Data in annotation system is kind of knowledge generated 
through  bunch  of  experiments  in  wet  laboratory.  So 
information  is  definitely  limited.  Researchers  could  9et 
inspiration  about  other  effects  of  certain  toxicant  and 
function of unknown genes. 

Discussion 
Now toxicogenomics have the power and potentiality to 
revolutionize  conventional  toxicology.  Several  toxicologists 
begin to apply toxicogenomic approach to understand the 
relationship  between  environmental  stress  and  human 
disease  susceptibility;  to  identify  useful  biomarkers  of 
disease and exposure to toxic substances; and to elucidate 
the molecular mechanisms of toxicity. In the vortex of this 
paradigm  shifts, 
is 
getting more important. To store, manage, analyze, and 
annotate toxicogenomic data, we recommend the novel 
system, XPERANTO-TOX. It has two significant differences 
as  against  the  existing  databases.  First,  XPERANTO(cid:173)
TOX could store not only different '-omics' data, but also 
conventional toxicology data. Second, 'Data Analysis and 
Annotation  System'  is  included  in  XPERANTO-TOX 
system,  so  analyst  could  easily  get  an  insight  into 
toxicogenomic data. The whole interface is not enough to 
serve,  but we are  now performing  pilot test.  Right after 
that, toxicologist could fully use XPERANTO-TOX. 

'Toxicogenomic  knowledgebase' 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported by a grant from TGRC project, 
Korea  Food  &  Drug  Administration,  Republic  of Korea. 
J.W and J.K's research  activity is supported by a grant 
from  Korea  Health  21  R&D  Project,  Ministry  of  Health 
and Welfare, Republic of Korea (0412-MI01-0416-0002). 

References 
Michael,  D.W.  and  Jennifer,  M.F.  (2004).  TOXICOGE 
NOMICS  AND  SYSTEMS  TOXICOLOGY:  AIMS  AND 
PROSPECTS,  Nature Genet.  5,  936-948. 

Hamadeh, H.K., Amin, R.P., Paules, R.S., and Afshari, C.A. 
(2002).  An  overview  of  toxicogenomics.  Curr.  Issues 
Mol.  Bioi.  4,  45-56. 

Aardema, M.J. and MacGregor, J.T. (2002). Toxicology and 
genetic  toxicology  in  the  new  era  of  'toxicogenomics': 
impact of '-omics' technologies.  Mutat.  Res.  499,  13-25. 
Mattes, W.B., Pettit, S.D., Sansone, S.A., Bushel, P.R., and 
Waters,  M.D.  (2004).  Database development in toxicog 
enomics:  issues and  efforts.  Environ.  Health  Perspect. 
112, 495-505. 

Laura, S., Lee,  E. B., and Eric B.W. (2004). Toxicogenomics 
in Predictive Toxicology in Drug Development. Chemistry 
& Biology 11,  161-171. 

Michael,  D.W.,  Kenneth,  0.,  and  Raymond,  W.T.  (2003). 
Toxicogenomic approach for assessing toxicant-related 
disease.  Mutation Research 544,  415-424. 

Lee,  H.W.,  Park,  Y.R.,  Sim,  J.H.,  Park,  R.W.,  Kim,  W.H., 

44  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 4(1) 40-44,  March 2006 

and  Kim,  J.H.  The  Tissue  Microarray  Object  Model:  a 
data model for storage, analysis and exchange of tissue 
microarray  experimental  data,  Archives  of  Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, accepted 

Bolstad,  S.M.,  Irizarry,  R.A.,  Astrand,  M.,  and  Speed,  T.P. 
(2003). A comparison of normalization methods for high 
density  oligonucleotide  array  data  based  on  variance 
and bias.  Bioinformatics 19,  185-193. 

Huber, W., von Heydebreck, A., Sultmann,  H.,  Poustka, A., 
and Vingron, M. (2002). Variance stabilization applied to 
microarray data calibration  and  to  the  quantification  of 
differential expression.  Bioinformatics 1,  1-9. 

Tusher, V.G., libshirani, R., and Chu, G. (2001). Significance 
analysis of  microarrays applied to the ionizing  radiation 
response.  Proc.  Nat!.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 98, 5116-5121. 

Baldi, P. and Long, A.D. (2001 ). A Bayesian Framework for 
the Analysis of Microarray Expression Data: Regularized 
t-Test  and  Statistical  Inferences  of  Gene  Changes. 
Bioinformatics 17, 509-519. 

Yang,  Y.H.,  Xiao,  Y.,  and  Segal,  M.R.  (2005).  Identifying 
differentially expressed genes from microarray experiments 
via statistic synthesis.  Bioinformatics 21 , 1 084-1 093. 

Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K., Mukherjee, S., 
Ebert, B.L., Gillette, M.A.,  Paulovich, A.,  Pomeroy, S.L., 
Golub,  T.R.,  Lander,  E.S.,  and  Mesirov,  J.P.  (2005) 
Gene  set  enrichment  analysis:  A  knowledge-based 
approach 
interpreting  genome-wide  expression 
profiles.  Proc.  Nat!.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 102, 15545-15550. 
Saidi,  S.A.,  Holland,  C.M.,  Kreil,  D.P.,  MacKay,  D.J., 

for 

Charnock-Jones,  D.S.,  Print,  C.G.,  and  Smith,  S.K. 
(2004).  Independent component analysis of microarray 
data in the study of endometrial  cancer.  Oncogene 23, 
6677-6683 

Brown,  M.P., Grundy, W.N.,  Lin,  D.,  Cristianini,  N.,  Sugnet, 
C.W.,  Furey, T.S.,  Ares,  M.  and Jr Haussler,  D.  (2000). 
Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression 
data by using support vector machines. Proc.  Nat!. Acad. 
Sci.  USA 97,  262-267. 

Tibshirani,  R.,  Hastie,  T.,  Narasimhan,  B.,  and  Chu,  G. 
(2002).  Diagnosis of multiple cancer types by shrunken 
centroids of gene expression.  Proc.  Nat/. Acad. Sci.  USA 
99,  6567-6572. 

Benson,  D.A.,  Boguski,  M.,  Lipman,  D.J.,  and  Ostell,  J. 

(1994).  GenBank.  Nucleic Acids Res.  22, 3441-3444. 

Mattingly,  C.J.,  Colby,  G.T.,  Rosenstein,  M.C.,  Forrest, 
J.N.Jr, Boyer, J.L. (2003). The Comparative Toxicogeno 
mics  Database  (CTD).  Environmental Health  Perspec(cid:173)
tives.  111 , 6. 

Tong, W., Cao, X.,  Harris, S., Sun, H., Fang, H., Fuscoe, J., 
Harris,  A.,  Hong,  H.,  Xie,  Q.,  Perkins,  R.,  Shi,  L.,  and 
Casciano, D. (2003). Array Track-supporting toxicogenomic 
research  at  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration 
National  Center  for  Toxicological  Research.  Environ 
HealthPerspect.111, 1819-1826. 

Hamosh,  A.,  Scott,  A.F.,  Amberger,  J.S.,  Bocchini,  C.A., 
and McKusick, V.A. (2001 ). Online Mendelian Inheritance 
in Man (OMIM),  a knowledgebase of human genes and 
genetic disorders.  Nucleic Acids Res. 30,  52-55. 

