APPLICATION NOTE
Genomics  &  Informatics
Vol.  9(3)  138-141,  September  2011

http://dx.doi.org/10.5808/GI.2011.9.3.138
pISSN 1598-866X    eISSN 2234-0742

A  Program  for  Efficient  Phasing  of  Three-Generation  Trio 
SNP  Genotype  Data

Sanghoon  Song  and  Sangsoo  Kim*

Department  of  Bioinformatics,  Soongsil  University,  Seoul 
156-743,  Korea

Abstract

Here,  we  report  a  computer  program  written  in  Python, 
which  phases  SNP  genotypes  and  infers  inherited  dele-
tions  based  on  the  pattern  of  Mendelian  inheritance 
within  a  trio  pedigree.  When  tiered  trio  genotypes  that 
encompass  three  generations  are  available,  it  narrows  a 
recombination  event  down  to  a  region  between  two 
consecutive  heterozygous  markers. 
In  addition,  the 
phase  information  that  is  inferred  from  the  upper  trio 
that  is  formed  by  one  of  the  parents  and  grandparents 
can  be  propagated  to  phase  the  genotypes  of  the  lower 
trio  that  is  formed  by  the  parents  and  an  offspring.

Availability: The  software  is  freely  available  to  nonprofit 
users  upon  request.

Keywords:  SNP,  phasing,  trio,  recombination,  CNV, 
Mendelian  inconsistency

Introduction

A  single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP)  refers  to  a  var-
iation  at  a  single  nucleotide  sequence  position  of  DNA 
that  is  observed  commonly  within  a  population  (typically 
at  least  1%).  Due  to  its  high  density  in  human  genomes, 
it  is  widely  used  in  disease  gene  mapping.  Humans  are 
diploid  organisms,  having  two  copies  of  each  autosomal 
chromosome.  A  haplotype  is  a  combination  of  alleles  on 
a  chromosome  that  are  transmitted  together  from  the 
parent.  Phasing  is  a  process  that  resolves  a  series  of 
consecutive  genotypes  into  a  haplotype  of  alleles  that 
are  transmitted  or  untransmitted.  Because  disease-caus-
ing  mutations  segregate  with  a  particular  haplotype,  an 
association  analysis  that  is  based  on  haplotype  may  be 
more  powerful  than  that  based  on  genotype  (Gabriel et 
al.,  2002).  Hence,  there  is  a  paramount  interest  in  phas-
ing  population  genotypes.  There  are  many  statistical  al-
gorithms  for  phasing  genotype  data  of  unrelated  pop-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  sskimb@ssu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-820-0457,  Fax  +82-2-824-4383
Accepted  2  September  2011

ulations  (Stephens et al.,  2003;  Browning,  2008).  Due  to 
their  statistical  nature,  there  are  some  errors  and  un-
certainty  in  these  methods.  On  the  other  hand,  phasing 
that  is  based  on  Mendelian  inheritance  patterns  within  a 
trio  family  is  straightforward  and  deterministic,  as  long 
as  one  of  the  members  is  homozygous  at  the  locus  of 
interest.  This  approach  fails  if  all  of  the  members  of  a 
trio  have  heterozygous  genotypes.  There  are  a  number 
of  statistical  approaches  that  deal  with  this  problem 
(Marchini  et al.,  2006).  However,  these  methods  are 
known  to  be  slow  or  produce  some  errors  (Iliadis et al., 
2010).  For  a  pedigree  in  which  tiered  trios  encompass 
three  generations,  the  upper  trio  is  formed  by  one  of  the 
parents  and  his  or  her  grandparents,  while  the  lower  trio 
is  formed  by  the  parents  and  their  offspring.  Of  loci  with 
a  minor  allele  frequency  of  20%,  5.1%  is  expected  to 
be  heterozygous  for  all  of  the  members  of  a  trio 
(Marchini  et al.,  2006),  while  it  drops  to  0.8%  for  a 
three-generation  pedigree.  The  deterministic  method  that 
is  mentioned  above  can  be  extended  to  these  mul-
ti-generation  trio  cases.  In  such  cases,  it  is  also  possi-
ble  to  infer  an  accurate  de  novo  recombination  map  by 
comparing  the  parental  phases  that  have  been  inherited 
from  grandparents  with  those  that  have  been  trans-
mitted  to  an  offspring.  In  this  paper,  we  report  an  effi-
cient  software  program  that  implements  all  of  these 
processes  in  one  pot.  During  trio  phasing,  some  mark-
ers  may  deviate  from  Mendelian  inheritance  patterns.  It 
is  called  Mendelian  inconsistency  and  has  served  as  a 
basis  for  the  detection  of  copy  number  variation  (CNV) 
(Conrad et al.,  2006;  Freeman et al.,  2006).  Our  program 
also  reports  a  list  of  putative  deletion  CNVs.  By  consid-
ering  three  generations  of  trios  simultaneously,  it  can 
identify  more  individuals  who  might  have  a  CNV.

Methods

An  overview  of  the  program  processes  is  shown  in  Fig. 
1.

Trio  phasing  of  SNP  genotypes  based  on  Men-
delian  inheritance  patterns

Phasing  amounts  to  deduce  which  parental  allele  has 
been  transmitted.  If  a  parent  has  a  homozygous  geno-
type  and  thus  the  same  allele,  it  is  immaterial  which  one 
has  been  transmitted.  As  we  know  which  allele  of  a 
child  has  been  transmitted  from  the  homozygous  parent, 

Efficient  Phasing  of  Three-Generation  Trio    139

Fig.  1.  A  flowchart  of  the  program.

we  can  deduce  that  the  other  allele  of  the  child  must 
have  been  transmitted  from  the  opposite  parent.  Once 
we  know  which  allele  of  a  child  is  paternal  and  which 
is  maternal,  we  can  also  deduce  the  untransmitted  allele 
of  a  parent.  Thus,  the  genotypes  of  both  parents  can  be 
phased.  If  both  parents  have  the  same  heterozygous 
genotype,  it  is  possible  to  phase  it  as  long  as  the  child 
has  a  homozygous  genotype  in  a  similar  way  as  above. 
If  the  genotype  of  the  child  as  well  as  both  parents  is 
heterozygous,  this  simple  rule  can  not  phase  the  geno-
types.  We  call  this  an  ‘all  heterozygote’  case,  and  our 
software  flags  it  as  unphased.

CNV  deletion  detection

Some  SNPs  may  violate  Mendelian  inheritance  patterns 
and  can  not  be  phased  as  above.  For  example,  a  pa-
rental  homozygote  allele  may  not  be  found  in  the  child. 
If  this  is  reproduced  in  multiple  individuals  and  thus  is 
due  to  neither  experimental  error  nor  de  novo  mutation, 
it  can  be  due  to  a  parental  deletion  mutation  that  has 
been  transmitte  d  to  the  child.  This  concept  has  been 
instrumental  in  discovering  the  deletion  polymorphisms 
of  CNVs  (Conrad et al.,  2006;  Freeman et al.,  2006).  By 
treating  such  a  deletion  as  one  of  the  alleles,  our  soft-
ware  can  phase  it  as  well.

Determination  of  recombination  loci  based  on 
three-  generation  trio  genotype  data

The  trio  phasing  that  we  have  implemented  above  can 
not  tell  the  phases  of  the  parental  chromosomes  before 
meiosis  but  can  for  those  after  the  recombination.  If  we 
can  phase  the  genotype  of  a  parent  independently,  we 
can  compare  the  two  phases  before  and  after  meiosis 
and  deduce  the  approximate  locus  where  de novo  re-
combination  has  occurred.  The  parental  phase  before 

Fig.  2.  Determination  of  the  region  where  recombination 
must  have  occurred.  Two  heterozygous  markers  are  con-
sidered.  Using  the  upper  trio,  the  genotypes  of  the  mother 
can  be  resolved  into  those  inherited  from  the  grandfather 
and  those  from  the  grandmother,  respectively,  shown  in 
blue  and  red.  Using  the  lower  trio,  the  chromosome  that 
has  been  transmitted  from  the  mother  to  the  offspring  can
be  inferred.  A  comparison  of  this  chromosome  with  those 
two  resolved  maternal  chromosomes  can  pinpoint  the  re-
gion  of  recombination,  which  is  marked  by  two  neighboring 
heterozygous  markers.

meiosis  can  be  inferred  if  the  genotypes  of  both  grand-
parents  are  available  through  the  trio  phasing  that  we 
have  implemented  above  (Fig.  2).  For  an  SNP  that  is 
heterozygous  for  the  parent,  it  can  be  determined  whe-
ther  the  allele  that  passed  on  to  the  offspring  is  from 
the  parent’s  maternal  or  paternal  chromosome.  The  lo-
cation  of  the  recombination  can  hence  be  localized  to 
the  region  that  is  spanned  by  the  two  closest  flanking 
heterozygous  markers  in  the  parent  (Kong et al.,  2010). 
We  call  this  the  ‘recombination  region’.

Phasing  ‘all  heterozygote’  cases  using  three- 
generation  trio  genotype

We  have  mentioned  a  so-called  ‘all-heterozygote’  case 
above,  in  which  all  three  members  of  a  trio  family  have 
heterozygous  genotypes.  In  such  a  case,  phasing  is  still 
possible  if  the  genotypes  of  both  grandparents  of  either 
parent  are  available  and  at  least  one  of  them  is  homo-
zygous.  For  example,  let  us  assume  that  the  genotypes 
of  the  mother’s  paternal  and  maternal  genotypes  are 
available  (Fig.  3).  In  this  case,  the  lower  trio  members 
all  have  heterozygous  ‘TC’  genotypes 
(‘all-hetero-
zygote’),  while  the  grandfather  has  a  homozygous  geno-

140    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(3)  138-141,  September  2011

Fig.  3.  Phasing  ‘all  heterozygous'  genotypes  based  on  three-generation  trio  genotypes.  (a)  The  pedigree  and  unphased  gen-
otypes  of  the  family.  The  blue  and  red  bars  next  to  the  mother  represent  the  chromosomes  inherited  from  her  father  and 
mother,  respectively.  The  recombination  pattern  of  these  two  chromosomes  is  depicted  next  to  the  child,  whose  paternal  sta-
tus  is  not  known,  and  the  chromosome  is  represented  by  a  white  bar.  The  approximate  location  of  the  marker  is  shown  by
an  arrow.  (b)  The  phased  genotypes  of  the  upper  trio.  The  blue  and  red  alleles  represent  those  transmitted  from  the  grand-
father  and  the  grandmother,  respectively,  to  the  mother,  while  the  black  alleles  are  untransmitted.  (c)  According  to  the  re-
combination  map  in  (a),  the  maternal  allele  of  the  child  must  have  originated  from  the  grandfather,  which  is  ‘C'.  (d)  The  final
phasing  status  of  the  pedigree.  Referring  to  the  child's  phase,  the  father's  genotype  can  be  phased.  The  allele  transmitted
from  the  father  is  shown  in  green.

Table  1.  Results  of  a  test  run  of  the  program  with  a  genotype  dataset  of  194  Korean  trios

Item

‘All-heterozygous’  loci  in  at  least  one  trio  family
The  loci  whose  phase  was  not  resolved  in  at  least  one  trio,  even  after
  three  generation  were  used  (29  families)
Average  number  of  recombination  events  per  chromosome
Average  number  of  inferred  deletion  CNVs  per  individual

Chr  1

5.79%

0.90%

7.97
8.38

Chr  2

5.80%

0.93%

10.14
  8.44

Chr3

5.82%

0.91%

8.55
7.89

Chr4

5.88%

0.98%

7.69
8.83

type,  which  enables  phasing  of  the  upper  trio  (Fig.  3b). 
At  this  stage  of  the  process,  we  still  can  not  tell  which 
allele  of  the  mother  has  been  transmitted  to  the  off-
spring.  By  phasing  the  neighboring  SNPs  in  both  the 
upper  and  lower  trios,  we  can  construct  a  recombina-
tion  map  as  described  above  and  tell  whether  the  ma-
ternal  part  of  this  locus  originated  from  the  grandfather 
or  grandmother  (Fig.  3a).  The  locus  must  be  outside  of 
the  so-called  ‘recombination  region’  mentioned  above, 
within  which  the  grandparental  origin  of  the  allele  is 
uncertain.  If  we  can  be  sure  that  the  locus  inherited  the 
allele  from  the  maternal  grandfather,  as  shown  in  Fig. 
3a,  the  genotype  of  the  offspring  can  be  phased  (Fig. 
3c),  and  subsequently,  that  of  the  father  can  be  phased 
as  well  (Fig.  3d).

Results  and  Discussion

The  algorithm  has  been  implemented  as  a  computer 
program,  written  in  Python,  executable  in  both  the  Linux 
and  Windows  operating  systems.  The  software  reads  in 
files  that  are  formatted  as  used  by  PLINK  that  is,  PED, 
MAP  formats  and  outputs  three  files,  one  each  for 
‘recombination  region’,  ‘all-heterozygote’  information, 
and  the  final  phases.  It  is  freely  available  upon  request.
    We  applied  this  software  to  a  genotype  dataset  of 
194  trio  families  collected  in  Korea  using  Illumina  370K- 
Duo  SNP  chips  (Park  et al.,  2009).  About  6%  of  the 
SNPs  were  so-called  ‘all-heterozygous’,  whose  geno-
types  of  all  three  trio  members  were  heterozygous 
(Table  1).  This  is  similar  to  the  frequency  that  is  ex-
pected  for  trios  5.1%  of  loci  with  a  minor  allele  fre-
quency  of  20%  (Marchini et al.,  2006).  Among  the  fami-

lies  in  the  dataset,  three-generation  trio  genotype  data 
are  available  for  29  families.  After  phasing,  based  on 
single-tier  trio  genotypes,  followed  by  recombination 
mapping,  based  on  two-tier  trio  genotypes,  the  ‘all-het-
erozygous’  genotypes  were  phased  as  described. 
Phasing  by  this  method  failed  for  about  1%  of  the 
SNPs,  as  none  in  the  pedigree  had  a  homozygous  gen-
otype  (Table  1).  As  a  byproduct  of  our  algorithm,  the de 
novo 
recombination  events  per  chromosome  were 
counted,  ranging  from  7  to  10  (Table  1).  In  addition,  pu-
tative  CNVs  were  inferred,  based  on  Mendelian  incon-
sistency:  2237  of  them  had  a  frequency  of  1%  or  more. 
Park et al.  also  analyzed  an  expanded  dataset  that  in-
cluded  basically  the  same  trio  families  in  this  analysis, 
as  well  as  199  additional  families  of  Korean-Vietnamese 
origin  (Park et al.,  2009).  They  had  filtered  the  candidate 
CNVs  by  examining  their  cluster  images,  which  we  did 
not  have  access  to,  reporting  putative  1029  CNVs, 
which  was  about  half  of  the  number  of  our  result. 
Among  1029  CNVs  that  were  reported  by  Park  et al., 
1014  were  found  in  our  results,  achieving  a  recovery 
rate  of  98.5%.  The  small  portion  of  CNVs  that  were  ob-
served  by  Park et al.  and  not  by  us  may  be  due  to  the 
difference  in  sample  sizes.  The  genotype  phasing  in-
formation  obtained  here  covers  more  than  99%  of  the 
SNP  markers  in  the  dataset.  The  phasing  result  from  our 
software  can  be  fed  into  other  statistical  phasing  pro-
grams,  such  as  PHASE,  in  order  to  resolve  the  phases 
of  the  rest  of  the  markers.  The  highly  accurate  phased 
haplotypes  that  have  been  obtained  here  may  serve  as 
seeds  for  and  thus  facilitate  the  phasing  of  genotypes 
of  unrelated  individuals  (Howie  et al.,  2009).

Acknowledgements

The  authors  are  grateful  to  Dr.  Jong  Young  Lee  and  col-
leagues  in  the  National  Institute  of  Health,  Korea  Center 
for  Disease  Control,  for  kindly  providing  the  trio  geno-
type  dataset  used  in  this  work.  This  work  was  sup-
ported  by  the  Basic  Science  Research  Program  through 
the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea  (NRF),  fund-
ed  by  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science,  and  Technol-
ogy  (NRF-2010-0021811).

Efficient  Phasing  of  Three-Generation  Trio    141

References

Browning,  S.R.  (2008).  Missing  data  imputation  and  hap-
for  genome-wide  association 

inference 

lotype  phase 
studies.  Hum. Genet. 124,  439-450.

Conrad,  D.F.,  Andrews,  T.D.,  Carter,  N.P.,  Hurles,  M.E.,  and 
Pritchard,  J.K.  (2006).  A  high-resolution  survey  of  deletion 
polymorphism  in  the  human  genome.  Nat. Genetics.  38, 
75-81.

Freeman,  J.L.,  Perry,  G.H.,  Feuk,  L.,  Redon,  R.,  McCarroll, 
S.A.,  Altshuler,  D.M.,  Aburatani,  H.,  Jones,  K.W., 
Tyler-Smith,  C.,  Hurles,  M.E.,  Carter,  N.P.,  Scherer,  S.W., 
and  Lee,  C.  (2006).  Copy  number  variation:  new  insights 
in  genome  diversity.  Genome Res.  16,  949-961.

Gabriel,  S.B.,  Schaffner,  S.F.,  Nguyen,  H.,  Moore,  J.M., 
Roy,  J.,  Blumenstiel,  B.,  Higgins,  J.,  DeFelice,  M., 
Lochner,  A.,  Faggart,  M.,  Liu-Cordero,  S.N.,  Rotimi,  C., 
Adeyemo,  A.,  Cooper,  R.,  Ward,  R.,  Lander,  E.S.,  Daly, 
M.J.,  and  Altshuler,  D.  (2002).  The  structure  of  haplotype 
blocks  in  the  human  genome. Science 296,  2225-2229.

Howie,  B.N.,  Donnelly,  P.,  and  Marchini,  J.  (2009).  A  flexible 
and  accurate  genotype  imputation  method  for  the  next 
generation  of  genome-wide  association  studies.  PLoS 
Genet. 5,  e1000529.

Iliadis,  A.,  Watkinson,  J.,  Anastassiou,  D.,  and  Wang,  X. 
(2010).  A  haplotype  inference  algorithm  for  trios  based 
on  deterministic  sampling.  BMC Genet. 11,  78.

Kong,  A.,  Thorleifsson,  G.,  Gudbjartsson,  F.,  Masson,  G., 
Sigurdsson,  A.,  Jonasdottir,  A.,  Walters,  B.,  Jonasdottir, 
A.,  Gylfason,  A.,  Kristinsson,  K.,  Gudjonsson,  S.,  Frigge, 
L.,  Helgason,  A.,  Thorsteinsdottir,  U.,  and  Stefansson,  K. 
(2010).  Fine-scale  recombination  rate  differences  between 
sexes,  populations  and  individuals.  Nature  467,  1099- 
1103.

Marchini,  J.,  Cutler,  D.,  Patterson,  N.,  Stephens,  M.,  Eskin, 
E.,  Halperin,  E.,  Lin,  S.,  Qin,  Z.S.,  Munro,  H.M.,  Abeca-
sis,  G.R.,  Donnelly,  P.,  and  International  HapMap  Con-
sortium.  (2006).  A  comparison  of  phasing  algorithms  for 
trios  and  unrelated  individuals.  Am. J. Hum. Genet.  78, 
437-450.

Park,  M.,  Kim,  D.J.,  Kim,  K.J.,  Hong,  C.B.,  Kim,  Y.J., 
Cheong,  H.S.,  Shin,  H.D.,  Lee,  E.J.,  Kim,  H.N.,  Chung, 
H.W.,  Kim,  E.K.,  Lee,  J.Y.,  and  Kim,  H.L.  (2009).    Gene 
associations  of  common  deletion  polymorphisms  in  fami-
lies  with  Avellino  corneal  dystrophy.  Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Comm. 387,  688-693.

Stephens,  M.,  and  Donnelly,  P.  (2003).  A  comparison  of  Ba-
yesian  methods  for  haplotype  reconstruction  from  pop-
ulation  genotype  data.  Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73,  1162- 
1169.

