Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  142-146,  September  2008

Structural  Bioinformatics  Analysis  of  Disease-related  Mutations

Seong-Jin  Park¶,  Sangho  Oh¶,  Daeui  Park* 
and  Jong  Bhak*

structural  property,  physico-chemical  property,  structural 
mutatomics

Korean  BioInformation  Center  (KOBIC),  KRIBB,  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea

Introduction

Abstract

In  order  to  understand  the  protein  functions  that  are  re-
lated  to  disease,  it  is  important  to  detect  the  correlation 
between  amino  acid  mutations  and  disease.  Many  mu-
tation  studies  about  disease-related  proteins  have  been 
carried  out  through  molecular  biology  techniques,  such 
as  vector  design,  protein  engineering,  and  protein  cry-
stallization.  However,  experimental  protein  mutation 
studies  are  time-consuming,  be  it in vivo  or in vitro.  We 
therefore  performed  a  bioinformatic  analysis  of  known 
disease-related  mutations  and  their  protein  structure 
changes  in  order  to  analyze  the  correlation  between  mu-
tation  and  disease.  For  this  study,  we  selected  111  dis-
eases  that  were  related  to  175  proteins  from  the  PDB 
database  and  710  mutations  that  were  found  in  the  pro-
tein  structures.  The  mutations  were  acquired  from  the 
Human  Gene  Mutation  Database  (HGMD).  We  selected 
point  mutations,  excluding  only  insertions  or  deletions, 
for  detecting  structural  changes.  To  detect  a  structural 
change  by  mutation,  we  analyzed  not  only  the  structural 
properties  (distance  of  pocket  and  mutation,  pocket 
size,  surface  size,  and  stability),  but  also  the  phys-
ico-chemical  properties  (weight,  instability,  isoelectric 
point  (IEP),  and  GRAVY  score)  for  the  710  mutations. 
We  detected  that  the  distance  between  the  pocket  and 

disease-related  mutation  lay  within  20  Å  (98.5%,  700 

proteins).  We  found  that  there  was  no  significant  corre-
lation  between  structural  stability  and  disease-causing 
mutations  or  between  hydrophobicity  changes  and  crit-
ical  mutations.  For  large-scale  mutational  analysis  of 
disease-causing  mutations,  our  bioinformatics  approach, 
using  710  structural  mutations,  called  “Structural 
Mutatomics,”  can  help  researchers 
to  detect  dis-
ease-specific  mutations  and  to  understand  the  biological 
functions  of  disease-related  proteins. 

Keywords:  human  gene  mutation  database  (HGMD), 

¶Equal  contribution
*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  jongbhak@yahoo.com, 
daeui@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8519,  Fax  +82-42-879-8535
Accepted  5  September  2008

Genetic  mutations  have  effects  on  disease  because  they 
alter  the  function  or  structure  of  essential  proteins. 
Protein  structure  changes  by  mutation  are  especially  im-
portant  for  understanding  the  mechanism  of  diseases 
that  are  caused  by  mutation.  Therefore,  many  mutation 
studies  about  disease-related  proteins  have  been  con-
ducted  using  molecular  biology  techniques  in  various 
species.  For  example,  in  superoxide  dismutase,  a  known 
antioxidant,  the  effect  of  the  L175  mutation  causes  a 
decrease  in  activity,  because  L175  changes  the  struc-
tural  stabilization  of  the  active  site  (Gabbianelli  et al., 
1997).  Also,  in  cytochrome  P450,  known  as  an  im-
portant  oxidase  for  drug  metabolism,  the  L358P  mutant 
shows  facilitation  of  electron  transfer  from  the  electron 
donor  and  acts  as  a  trigger  for  electron  transfer  to  oxy-
genated  P450.  Mutated  cytochrome  P450  changes  from 
an  oxidase  to  a  reductase  and  causes  a  loss  of  function 
of  the  oxidase  (Tosha  et  al.,  2004).  Recently,  the 
I47A/I54V  protease  mutant  in  complex  with  Lopinavir 
showed  that  mutation  affects  the  strain  of  the  bound  in-
hibitor  in  the  protease-binding  cleft  (Grantz  Saskova  et 
al.,  2008).  In  previous  studies,  the  mutation  of  specific 
sites  has  been  shown  to  have  an  effect  on  the  function 
and  structure  of  proteins  that  cause  disease.  It  is  well 
known  that  there  is  a  correlation  between  mutated  pro-
teins  and  disease.  Also,  there  are  bioinformatic  tools  to 
predict  the  correlation  between  mutation  and  disease, 
(Steven  Henikoff  et  al.,  2003)  and 
such  as  SIFT 
PolyPhen  (Vasily  Ramensky  et  al.,  2002).  However, 
these  tools  are  based  only  on  sequence  homology. 
    In  this  study,  we  conducted  a  large-scale  structural 
and  sequence  mutational  analysis  of  amino  acids  that 
could  have  a  direct  effect  on  protein  function.  Because 
we  collected  the 
largest  number  of  3D  structural 
changes  in  proteins,  such  as  pockets,  we  named  the 
dataset  the  “structural  mutatome.”  The  number  of  such 
structural  mutations  will  increase  continuously,  and 
mapping  the  mutations  to  function  and  to  disease  will 
play  a  critical  role  in  understanding  the  precise  disease 
mechanisms  that  are  caused  by  3D  mutations.  We  clas-
sified  mutated  proteins  by  their  structural  properties 
(distance  of  pocket  residue  and  mutation,  pocket  size, 
surface  size,  and  stability)  and  physico-chemical  proper-
ties  (weight,  instability,  isoelectric  point,  and  GRAVY 

score).  We  analyzed  the  biological  meaning  of  the  mu-
tated  proteins  that  were  associated  with  diseases  using 
bioinformatics  tools  such  as  Biopython  (Chapman et al., 
2000),  Ligsite  (Hendlich  et al.,  1997),  NACCESS  (Hub-
bard et al.,  1993),  and  I-mutant  (Capriotti  et al.,  2004). 
The  overall  approach  of  our  study  was  to  map  as  many 
structural  mutations  as  possible  and  find  general  pat-
terns  to  analyze  3D  mutations  with  regard  to  protein 
function  using  as  many  bioinformatic  analysis  methods 
as  possible.  The  overall  strategy  was  termed  “Structural 
Mutatomics,”  because  it  is  intended  to  find  interactions 
between  mutations,  structural  changes,  physico-chem-
ical  aberrations,  and  disease  states  that  are  found  in  the 

A)

B)

Fig.  1.  The  flowchart  for  structural  analysis.  (A)  In  order  to 
detect  correlations  between  structure  and  disease-related 
mutations,  we  performed  sequential  procedures,  including 
conversion  of  genes  to  proteins,  PSI-Blast,  protein  structure 
modeling,  physico-chemical  analysis,  and  structural  analysis. 
(B)  Scores  and  Analysis  Procedures.

Bioinformatics  Analysis  of  Point  Mutations    143

literature  and  in  databases.

Methods

We  constructed  a  computational  pipeline  (structural  mu-
tatomics  pipeline)  for  structural  analysis  of  mutations 
that  were  associated  with  diseases.  Our  analysis  sche-
ma  is  briefly  described  in  Fig.  1A.

Extraction  of  mutation  information 

The  Human  Gene  Mutation  Database  (HGMD)  is  a  col-
lated  database  for  known  (published)  gene  lesions  that 
are  responsible  for  human  inherited  diseases.  HGMD 
currently  includes  information  on  the  nature,  location, 
and  sequence  context  of  lesions  in  human  nuclear 
genes  (http://www.hgmd.org;  Stensonet et al.,  2003).  We 
collected  information,  including  disease,  gene  symbol, 
gene  name,  nucleotide  base,  codon,  OMIM  ID,  and 
cDNA  accession  number  from  HGMD  professional  ver-
sion  2008.1.  We  retrieved  2899  genes  and  43,039  muta-
tions  (Table  1),  and  we  stored  the  information  in  a  local 
MySQL  database  (http://www.mysql.com).

Gene-to-protein  conversion

In  order  to  map  mutations  in  proteins,  we  converted  the 
mutated  genes  into  reference  proteins.  The  human  pro-
tein  sequences  were  retrieved  from  gene2accession 
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/)  and  NCBI  (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih. 
gov/pub/nrdb/),  which  have  comprehensive,  nonredun-
dant,  and  well-annotated  sets.  We  matched  782  pro-
teins  and  5515  mutations  from  genes  in  HGMD  (Table 
1).  The  match  was  parsed  with  a  locally  developed  Perl 
program  (http://www.perl.org).

Protein  structure  prediction

Proteins  with  mutations  do  not  always  have  3D  struc-
tures  that  are  solved  and  deposited  in  PDB  (http://www. 
rcsb.org/pdb/).  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  construct  3D 
models  for  many  genes.  Once  we  obtain  3D  models  for 
any  gene,  we  can  look  at  the  location  of  the  mutation 

Table  1.  The  number  of  genes  or  proteins  and  mutations

Name

HGMD

Gene2accession

Modeller

The  number  of  genes 
  or  proteins
Point  mutation

2,899

782

43,039

5,515

175

710

The  final  numbers  used  for  the  analysis  are  shown  in  the 
last  column,  under  MODELLER  program.

144    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  142-146,  September  2008

(Chapman  et al.,  2000)  to  calculate  molecular  weight, 
isoelectric  point  (IEP),  protein  instability  (half  life),  and 
GRAVY  score  (the  average  hydropathy  score  for  all  ami-
no  acids)  (Park  et al.,  2008).  Also,  we  calculated  the 
Score-the  difference  in  physico-chemical  properties  be-
tween  the  wild-type  and  mutation  sequences  (Supple-
mental  Table  2,  http://www.kogo.or.kr).

Results

To  get  an  intuitive  view  of  each  Score,  we  made  a 
two-dimensional  scale  plot,  assigning  the  X-axis  as  mu-
tated  protein  count  and  the  Y-axis  as  structural  proper-
ties  or  physico-chemical  properties  (Fig.  1B).  The  two 
scores  were  defined  as  “Wild-type  physico-chemical 
property  scores?Mutated  physico-chemical  property 
scores”  and  “Wild-type  protein  structural  property 
scores-Mutated  protein  structural  property  scores.”

The  physical  distance  between  protein  pockets 
and  mutated  residues

To  detect  which  specific  mutation  patterns  were  asso-
ciated  with  diseases,  we  retrieved  distance  scores  for 
the  structural  phenotypes  on  two-dimensional  scale 
plots  (Fig.  2).  Surprisingly,  43%  of  mutations  occurred 
on  residues  that  were  components  of  pockets.  Also,  in 

most  cases,  the  distance  was  less  than  20 Å (confidence 

98.5%).  This  means  that  the  mutated  residues  were  very 
close  to  the  protein  pockets.  The  mutations  that  oc-
curred  in  the  pockets  of  each  size  in  structural  models 
affected  the  binding  and  formation  of  complexes  by  the 
mutated  proteins.  An  outlier  of  this  pattern  was  found 
for  Dilated  Cardiomyopathy,  a  condition  in  which  the 

in  3D.  This  is  a  simple  way  of  detecting  what  kind  of 
adverse  effects  that  a  mutation  can  have  on  a  protein. 
For  effective  structure  modeling,  710  human  proteins 
were  aligned  with  proteins  that  had  structures  in  PDB 
using  the  PSI-BLAST  (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/)  al-
gorithm  with  a  cutoff  of  30%  sequence  identity,  70% 
sequence  length  coverage,  PSI-BLAST  iteration  5,  and  a 
common  expect  value  (E-value)  of  0.0001.  If  the  query 
protein  had  100%  sequence  identity  with  any  PDB  tem-
plate,  the  protein  was  used  directly  without  homology 
modeling  (52  proteins).  For  123  proteins,  we  predicted 
the  3D  structures  of  the  proteins  using  MODELLER9v4 
by  the  Homology  Modeling  methodology  (John  et al., 
2003).  The  MODELLER  program  automatically  con-
structs  an  all-atom  3D  model  using  one  or  more  align-
ments  between  the  query  sequence(s)  and  known  ho-
mologous  structures.  We  were  able  to  retrieve  175  pro-
teins  with  mutations  out  of  710  because  not  all  782  pro-
teins  had  homologous  structures  (Table  1).

Structural  analysis 

To  analyze  the  correlation  between  structure  and  muta-
tion,  we  calculated  the  distances  between  structural 
pockets  on  proteins  and  mutation  sites,  the  change  of 
pocket  size  due  to  mutation,  the  change  of  protein  sur-
face  size  caused  by  mutation,  and  the  change  of  stabil-
ity  affected  by  mutation.  Pockets  in  proteins  are  usually 
critical  for  their  work.  Therefore,  any  nearby  mutated 
pockets  can  have  deleterious  effects,  causing  disease. 
The  distance  between  a  pocket  and  a  mutation  was  de-
tected  as  the  average  RMSD  (root  mean  square  dis-
tance)  of  the  distances  between  all  residues  that  partici-
pated  in  a  pocket  and  a  mutation  residue.  To  find 
changes  in  pocket  size,  protein  surface,  and  protein  sta-
bility,  we  used  Ligsite  (Hendlich et al.,  1997)  which  cal-
culates  the  size  of  pocket  means  potential  ligand-bind-
ing  site  by  the  PSP  (protein-solvent-protein)  method, 
NACCESS  (Hubbard  et al.,  1993)  which  calculates  the 
atomic  accessible  area  when  a  probe  is  rolled  around 
the  Van  der  Waals  surface  of  a  macromolecule  and 
I-mutant  (Capriotti et al.,  2004)  which  calculates  the  free 
energy  change  of  protein  stability  using  a  support  vector 
machine.  The  overall  difference  between  a  mutated  gene 
and  its  wild-type  version  was  measured  by  Score,  cal-
culated  as  “Wild-type  Score 
-  Mutation  Score” 
(Supplemental  Table  1,  http://www.kogo.or.kr).

Physico-chemical  analysis 

The  physico-chemical  properties  of  mutated  proteins  are 
important  in  order  to  understand  biological  functions. 
We  used  modules  from  Biopython  (http://biopython.org) 

Fig.  2.  Two-dimensional  analysis  of  distance.  X-axis  is  mu-
tated  protein  count.  Y-axis  is  Score  of  distance.  Except  for 
cardiomyopathy  proteins,  most  protein  mutations  are  close 
to  pockets.

heart  becomes  weakened  and  enlarged,  wherein  dis-
tance  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  mutation.  We  found 
that  the  Dilated  Cardiomyopathy  protein  was  very  large, 
and  the  mutation  location  was  far  from  the  pockets  of 
each  size.  Most  mutations  that  were  found  close  to  the 
pockets  were  relatively  small  in  size. 

Fig.  3.  Two-dimensional  analysis  of  pocket  size.  X-axis  is 
mutation  protein  count.  Y-axis  is  score  of  pocket  size. 
Y-axis  shows  the  pocket  size  change  after  mutation,  calcu-
lated  using  3D  models.

Bioinformatics  Analysis  of  Point  Mutations    145

The  difference  in  pocket  size  between  wild-type 
and  mutated  proteins

We  calculated  the  largest  pocket  size  score  in  a  struc-
tural  phenotype  and  two-dimensional  scale  plot  (Fig.  3). 
A  mutated  protein  that  is  associated  with  disease  usu-
ally  has  an  effect  on  pocket  size.  The  mechanism  of 
protein-protein  docking  also  is  affected  according  to 
pocket  size.  In  Fig.  3,  circled  in  red,  there  were  pocket 

sizes  that  were  larger  than  2000 Å3.  This  indicates  that 

a  single  point  mutation  that  is  associated  with  a  disease 
can  be  a  significant  factor  in  protein  structure.  For  ex-
ample,  the  A428T  mutation  in  Impaired  Diclofenac 
Metabolism  (NP_000762.2)  caused  that  pocket  size  to 

change  from  1365 Å3  to  1829 Å3,  because  the  mutation 

created  a  new  hole  in  the  pocket  (Fig.  5).

The  difference  in  protein  instability  index  be-
tween  wild-type  and  mutated  proteins

We  also  calculated  the  instability  Score  for  phys-
ico-chemical  properties  in  a  two-dimensional  scale  plot 
(Fig.  4).  A  mutation  site  that  is  associated  with  disease 
produces  a  molecular  weight  difference 
in  most 
proteins.  Proteins  were  degraded  rapidly  above  an  in-

Fig.  4.  Two-dimensional  analysis 
of  instability.  X-axis  is  mutation 
protein  count.  Y-axis  is  Mutation 
Score  of  instability.  Most  proteins 
showed  relatively  small  differences 
before  and  after  mutation  in  terms 
of  stability.

Fig.  5.  The  change  in  pocket  size 
by  point  mutation.  A  is  the  3D 
structure  of  a  wild-type  protein.  B 
is  the  3D  structure  of  the  A448T 
mutant.  The  red  surface  is  a  point
mutation,  and  the  yellow  surface 
is  a  pocket  site.  The  pocket  size 

changed  from  1365 Å3  to  1829 Å3

by  mutation.  The  A448T  mutation 
in  the  NP_000762  protein  causes 
impaired  diclofenac  metabolism. 

146    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  142-146,  September  2008

stability  index  of  40.  Fig.  4  shows  the  instability  Score. 
The  mutated  protein  was  usually  unstable,  as  seen  by 
an  increase  in  the  instability  Score.  In  Fig.  4,  the  pattern 
of  instability  showed  values  between  2  and  -2. 

Discussion
dues  and  protein  surface  pockets  was  less  than  20 Å 

For  most  proteins,  the  distance  between  mutated  resi-

(confidence  98.5%).  This  means  that  pockets  often  are 
affected  by  mutations  that  are  associated  with  diseases. 
Mutated  residues  that  are  close  to  pockets  can  change 
the  binding  of  proteins  to  other  proteins  and  the  for-
mation  of  complexes.  The  pocket  size  also  was  affected 
by  mutation  in  our  two-dimensional  scale  analysis  of 
structural  property.  If  a  ligand  can  not  interlock  with  its 
target  protein,  it  can  lead  to  the  failure  of  protein-protein 
docking.  On  the  contrary,  there  was  no  significant 
change  in  stability  between  the  wild-type  and  mutated 
proteins  in  many  cases.  Our  large-scale  survey  of  3D 
mutations  in  the  PDB  and  our  models  to  analyze  the  ef-
fects  of  mutation  on  pockets,  pocket  size,  and  stability 
showed  that  bioinformatic  analysis  can  predict  the  un-
certain  effects  of  mutations  on  proteins  in vivo  and  in 
vitro.  This  will  help  researchers  to  detect  more  specific 
mutations  and  to  understand  the  biological  functions  of 
disease-related  proteins.

Acknowledgments

We  thank  our  colleagues  at  KOBIC  and  Maryana  Bhak 
for  editing  the  manuscript.  This  work  was  supported  by 
a  grant  from  the  KRIBB  Research  Initiative  Program  of 
Korea,  by  the  Korea  Science  and  Engineering  Founda-
tion  (KOSEF)  grant  funded  by  the  Korean  government 
(MOST)  (No.  M10508040002-07N0804-00210),  and  by  a 
Korea  Basic  Science  Institute  K-Mep  grant  (T28021).

References

Capriotti,  E.,  Fariselli,  P.,  and  Casadio,  R. 

(2005). 

I-Mutant2.0:  predicting  stability  changes  upon  mutation 
from  the  protein  sequence  or  structure.  Nucleic Acids 
Res.  33,  W306-W310.

Chapman,  B.,  and  Chang,  J.  (2000).  Biopython:  python 
tools  for  computational  biology.  ACM SIGBIO Newsletter 
20,  15-19. 

Gabbianelli,  R.,  Battistoni,  A.,  Polticelli,  F.,  Meier,  B., 
Schmidt,  M.,  Rotilio,  G.,  and  Desideri,  A.  (1997).  Effect  of 
function  properties  of 
Lys175  mutation  on  structure 
Propionibacterium 
superoxide 
dismutase. 
Protein Engineering  10,  1067-1070.

shermanii 

Grantz  Saskova,  K.,  Kozisek,  M.,  Lepsik,  M.,  Brynda,  J., 
Rezacova,  P.,  Vaclavikova,  J.,  Kagan,  R.,  Machala,  L., 
and  Konvalinka,  J.  (2008).  Contributing  to  the  Reduced 
Susceptibility  to  HIV  Protease  Enzymatic  and  Structural 
Analysis  of  the  I47A  Mutation  Inhibitor  Lopinavir.  Protein 
Sci.  17,  1555-1564.

Hendlich,  M.,  Rippmann,  F.,  and  Barnickel,  G.  (1997). 
LIGSITE:  automatic  and  efficient  detection  of  potential 
small  molecule-binding  sites  in  proteins.  J. Mol. Graph. 
Model.  15,  359-363.

Hubbard,  S.J.,  and  Thornton,  J.M. 

(1993).  NACCESS 
Computer  Program.  Dept.  of  Biochem.  and  Mol.  Biol., 
University  College  London.

Jackson,  D.A.,  and  Chen,  Y.  (2004).  Robust  principal  com-
ponent  analysis  and  outlier  detection  with  ecological 
data.  Environmetrics  15,  129-139.

John,  B.,  and  Sali,  A.  (2003).  Comparative  protein  structure 
modeling  by  iterative  alignment,  model  building  and  mod-
el  assessment.  Nucleic Acids Res.  31,  3982-3992. 

Ng,  P.C.,  and  Henikoff,  S.  (2003).  SIFT:  predicting  amino 
acid  changes  that  affect  protein  function.  Nucleic Acids 
Res.  31,  3812-3814.

Park,  D.I.,  Kim,  B.C.,  Cho,  S.W.,  Park,  S.J.,  Choi,  J.S.,  Kim, 
S.I.,  Bhak,  J.,  and  Lee,  S.H.  (2008).  MassNet:  a  func-
tional  annotation  service  for  protein  mass  spectrometry 
data.  Nucleic Acids Research  36,  W491-W495.

Ramensky,  V.,  Bor,  P.,  and  Sunyaev,  S.  (2002).  Human 
non-synonymous  SNPs:  server  and  survey. Nucleic Acids 
Res.  30(17),  3894-3900.

Tosha,  T.,  Yoshioka,  S.,  Ishimori,  K.,  and  Morishima,  I. 
(2004).  L358P  Mutation  on  Cytochrome  P450cam  Simu-
lates  Structural  Changes  upon  Putidaredoxin  Binding. 
JBC  279,  42836-42843.

