Application  Notes 

Genomics &  Informatics  VoL  2(4)  191-194, December2004 

The BIOWAY System: A Data Warehouse for Generalized 
Representation & Visualization of Bio-Pathways 

Min Kyung  Kirn1
Lee1
Ahn3

,  Sang Ho 
,  Eun Ha Song1
,  Chang Shin 
,  Eun Chung ChoP  and Hyun Seok Park1
·

,  Young Joo Seol2

3
•

,  Ho II  Lee2

3
•

2 * 

way  that  all  the  pathway  maps  can  be  expanded  or 
shrinked,  by  introducing  the  concept  of super  node.  A 
subtle graphic layout algorithm has been applied to best 
display the pathway data. 

1Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering, 
Ewha  University,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea,  2 lnstitute  of 
Bioinformatics,  Macrogen  Inc.,  Seoul  153-023,  Korea, 
3School  of  Computer  Engineering,  Sejong  University, 
Seoul  143-747,  Korea 

Keywords:  visualization,  pathway, data warehouse, modeling 
Availablity:  http:!/203.241. 70.162 

Abstract 
Exponentially  increasing  biopathway  data  in  recent 
years provide us with means to elucidate the large-scale 
modular  organization  of  the  cell.  Given  the  existing 
information  on  metabolic  and  regulatory  networks, 
inferring  biopathway 
through  scientific 
reasoning  or  data  mining  of  large  scale  array  data  or 
proteomics data get great attention.  Naturally, there is a 
need  for  a  user-friendly  system  allowing  the  user  to 
combine  large  and  diverse  pathway  data  sets  from 
different resources. 

information 

We built a data warehouse - BIOWAY- for analyzing 
and  visualizing  biological  pathways,  by  integrating  and 
customizing 
resources.  We  have  collected  many 
different types of data in  regards to pathway information, 
including  metabolic pathway data from  KEGG/LIGAND, 
from  BIND,  and  protein 
signaling  pathway  data 
information data from SWISS-PROT. 

In  addition 

to  providing  general  data  retrieval 
mechanism,  a successful  user interface should  provide 
convenient  visualization  mechanism  since  biological 
is  difficult  to  conceptualize  without 
pathway  data 
graphical representations. Still, the visual interface in the 
previous systems, at best, uses static images only for the 
specific categorized pathways. Thus, it is difficult to cope 
with more complex pathways. In the BIOWAY system, all 
the  pathway  data  can  be  displayed 
in  computer 
generated  graphical  networks,  rather  than  manually 
drawn image data.  Furthermore,  it is designed in such a 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail hspark@macrogen.com, 
Tel +82-2-2113-7007,  Fax +82-2-2113-7016 
Accepted  6 November 2004 

Summary 

General-purpose  database  integration  systems  aim  at 
integrating  data  from  remote  heterogeneous  sources. 
Compiled  systems  can  serve  as  a platform for  various 
special-purpose  systems.  EnsEMBL  is  an  excellent 
example of a successful integration of data and tools for 
the genome browsing (Wong., 2002; Clamp eta/., 2003). 
In case of pathway data, PFBP (Protein Function and 
Biochemical  Pathway)  project  is  an  on-going  project, 
lead  by  EBI  (van  Heiden  et a/.,  2001 ).  Its  main  output, 
aMAZE  database  that  is  constructed  by  parsing  data 
from  BRENDA,  KEGG/LIGAND,  and  EMP  primarily 
focuses on the metabolic pathways.  Each database has 
its own  ontology and  data model  and  is suitable for the 
representation  of  metabolism,  gene  regulation,  and 
signal transduction.  But it has limitations;  it does not yet 
provide  signaling  and  protein  interaction  data  in  their 
alpha version. 

Although  KEGG  contains  metabolic  and  regulatory 
pathway information,  it contains  manually drawn  image 
data rather than  machine executable formats.  To make 
matters worse,  it is  hard to understand interconnection 
among  pathways  because  EC(Enzyme  Classification) 
numbers  are  used  in  metabolic  pathways  instead  of 
protein  names  in  regulatory  pathways.  There  is  a 
consortium,  called  BIOPAX,  which  aims to  standardize 
data  exchange  formats,  data  models  and  ontology  for 
biopathways. 

By combining the merits of previous systems, we have 
built a data warehouse,  named  BIOWAY by integrating 
and  customizing  pathway  data  from  various  resources 
(especially focused  on  pathways  regarding  agricultural 
microorganisms). The BIOWAY system is designed as a 
three-layer application as shown  Fig.  1:  a layer for data 
repository(Database  Layer), 
for 
analyzing biopathway data( Analysis Layer), and the third 
level for providing interfaces layer (Visualization  Layer). 
The BIOWAY system has been uniformly written in Java 
with  ORACLE9i.  For data  exchange  between  analysis 
and visualization, the system offers an XML export. 

the  second 

layer 

192  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 191-194, December 2004 

. 1~-1 
.I:::::.:. 
I 
,,~~'":="I 

:.·--: 

;CmlfrmtJv~ 

.........-.-/ 

';v  .. DBlJIIrdllle 

I 

----h .... 

Fig.  1.  The system Architecture of BIOWAY. 

-To  

Database Layer 

There  are four  representative  entity types  in  BIOWAY: 
nodes,  interactions,  pathways,  and  networks.  The four 
entity types have recursive hierarchical relationship. The 
relationship  between  nodes  is  interaction.  A  set  of 
interactions  is  used  for  the  description  of pathways.  A 
network is composed of a set of pathways. Pathways can 
be  considered  as  a  node  in  a  network.  According  to 
these  data  model,  we  show  the  whole  network  as 
pathway of pathways. Any molecules in a cell are nodes 
in  BIOWAY.  It contains five sub-entity sets:  DNA,  RNA, 
protein,  complex and compound. A DNA node contains 
only  a  small  number  of  regulatory  sequences  (eg 
promoter regions) from BIND since Protein coding DNA 
data  is stored  in  a separate GENE table.  A  RNA node 
contains snRNA that is a component of snRNP. Majority 
of  the  nodes  are  proteins  whose  annotations  are 
extracted 
from  SWISS-PROT,  KEGG/LIGAND  and 
BIND  (Boeckmann  et a/.,  2003;  Kanehisa  et a/.,2002; 
Bader eta/., 2003). The protein information is recognized 
by SWISS-PROT id and Gl  number. 
the  result  of 

interactions  and 
ensemble  of nodes  that  can  be  co-purified  from  a  cell 
culture  or  tissue.  Since  complexes  are  usually  joined 
pathways  together,  we  consider  it  as  a  separate 
component of the entity. We applied a guideline that the 
entity found in SWISS-PROT is classified as protein and 
the  entity  found  in  BIND  COMPLEX  is  classified  as 
complex.  Other  nodes  such  as  small  molecules  and 
compounds might be more difficult to define at present. 
We have checked  every  item for the integration  of the 
molecules  from  KEGG/LIGAND  and  BIND  databases. 
Small  molecules  such  as  ATP,  NADPH,  and  NADH 
should  be  notified  for  the  computation  of  biological 
processes  because  they  participate  in  complicated 
interaction steps frequently.  For example, if we compute 
biological processes A-----'» B- C, given interaction A- B 
and B - C,  interacting partner of small molecules would 

Complexes  are 

be too big to handle . 

Interactions represent the operations in which  nodes 
participate.  There  are  two  types  of interactions:  direct 
interaction  (such  as  reaction,  assembly,  modification) 
and regulation (such as catalysis, control). The interaction 
between nodes belongs to direct interaction. Regulation 
is  an  interaction  between  node  and  interaction.  For 
example,  transcriptional  regulation  is  the  interaction 
between regulatory molecules (node) and transcriptional 
process(direct  interaction  between  DNA  and  RNA). 
Each  interaction  has  several  attributes  for  example 
direction.  If it was originated  form  chemical  reaction,  it 
should be contained to represent metabolic pathway. 

Pathways are ordered sequences of binary interaction. 
BIOWAY aims to describe all kinds of pathways such as 
genetic  network,  signal  transduction  and  metabolic 
pathways by sets of interactions between the nodes. For 
the  construction  of BIOWAY database,  we convert the 
format  of  raw  pathway  data  from  KEGG/LIGAND 
database to metabolic pathways as shown figure 2 (Kim 
and Park, 2002). While a signaling pathway is represented 
as a series of interactions, metabolic pathway is not. We 
want  to  describe  metabolic  pathway  as  a  series  of 
interactions  like  signaling  pathway  and  focus  on  the 
possibility that metabolic pathway could  represent as a 
set of binary interactions. 

Networks are described as a set of pathways and useful 
for the representation of crosstalk and interdependency 
among  different  kinds  of pathways.  Networks  are 
designed for the proteins participating in metabolic and 
signaling  pathway  at  the  same  time.  These  kinds  of 
proteins are acting as a hub in a cell  (Kim eta/., 2003). 
For example,  Raf protein  takes  part  in  several  kinds of 
metabolic pathways such as spingolipid, inositol phosphate, 
starch/sucrose,  nicotinate/nicotinamide metabolism, benzoate 
degradation (in KEGG) and EGFR signaling pathway (in 

Genetic 
networ~~ 

t§t!i!L---:-J 
~-~ 
'--l-"-"j 
!!~-~~"'"-·' l 

.~··. 

·~~] 
·.N•~ 
'fii~-J 

~:Piiliifn--=-~"-----:-. - . -

~· 
--~~"---· 
1~  ~,-~.  ····· "fPftMt-.··~--J 
Sigllal tran&d!£tion 

•:kll~" 

. 

Fig.  2.  The data model of BIOWAY. Protein-protein interaction, 
signal  transduction,  genetic  network  and  metabolic  pathway 
are represented as a single schema. 

The BIOWAY System: A Data Warehouse for Generalized Representation & Visualization of Bio-Pathways  193 

BIND).  Whereas  the  crosstalk  between  pathways  in 
KEGG and  BIND database is limited to its own pathway 
domain,  BIOWAY could  represent  all  kinds  of pathway 
under a single schema as illustrated in  Fig. 2. 

Analysis Layer 
This  layer  consists  of  several  modules:  PathViewer, 
BioTextMiner,  3DViewer,  BioPathCad, and  PathFinder. 
PathFinder  is  a  new  tool  for  computing  the  entire 
biopathway based  on  the binary representation of each 
reaction.  It  has  been  tested  on  the  130  metabolic 
pathways and  8 regulatory pathways.  Given two  nodes 
in  the  pathway  maps,  this  module  will  return  all  the 
possible  paths  between  nodes,  sorted  in  the  order  of 
scoring parameters. 

BioPathCad  module  makes  it  possible  to  edit  the 
computer-generated pathway maps.  Much of the design 
of  this  module  is  based  on  the  general  CAD  system 
which  is  usually  used  in  architecture  field.  Important 
background  knowledge in  bioinformatics is often buried 
in textual documents. 

The  role  of  BioTextMiner  module  is  to  search  the 
literature  and  automatically  extract  information  from 
abstracts and  papers,  to provide two essential research 
support  services:  accelerating  user's  task  by  partially 
automating  the  process  to  find  the  relations  between 
genes  and  gene  products,  and  providing  a convenient 
environment for researchers, annotating (or tagging) the 
biological literature in response to queries from biological 
experts.  Text  mining  methods 
term 
recognition  to  extraction  of  complex  relationships  of 
interaction  between  proteins.  It  is  expected  that  text 
mining  in  general  will  provide  tools  to  facilitate  the 
annotation of vast amounts of biological pathways. 

range 

from 

Visualization Layer 
This  layer  is  directly  related  to  PathViewer  module  in 
Analysis Layer. 

framework 

Graphlayout module is designed to display pathway 
data. A subtle graphic layout algorithm has been applied 
to best display the pathway data. We used yFiles which 
provides  a  powerful 
for  visualization 
applications.  In  the  BIOWAY system,  users  can  select 
the pathways to  show more than  2 pathways at a time 
(Fig.  3).  And  each  specialized  pathways  could  be 
represented  as  a  single  node  and  this  abstraction 
process  has  been  made  to  be  reversible.  Combining 
several pathways to make a bigger pathway is possible, 
due  to  our  layer-based  GUI  design.  All  objects  inherit 

Fig.  3.  The result of layout.  Users can select pathways in the 
left pathway list. This figure shows the case of Glycolysis, TCA 
cycle, Pentose Phosphate, and Inositol metabolism pathways. 
from  one  super-class.  Each  subclass  inherits attributes 
from all  of its super-classes. 

Future Direction 
We  have  parsed  the  core  information  from  flat  files  of 
KEGG/LIGAND,  SWISS-PROT  and  XML  type  BIND 
data.  The  information allows data retrieval through user 
interface (Fig.  4).  Current prototype represents range of 
protein-protein 
interaction,  signaling  and  metabolic 
pathway,  and  network  information  by  simple  binary 
interactions (see Table 1.). The database will be extended 
to  transcriptional  regulation(TRANSFAC),  3D  structure 
database(CATH),  protein  motif(PROSITE)  and  disease 
related gene database(OMIM). Some of our future plans 
are to: 

•  design  a  mining  method  for  finding  a  meaningful 

pathway. 

•  fine tune for data model 
•  suggest data submission form. 
Identification  of  appropriate  knowledge  discovery 
problems  and  development  of  evaluation  methods  for 
data  mining  results  are  also  our  ongoing  efforts.  For 
future versions, the concept of quality(for example, time 
and  condition)  and  quantity(for example,  flux,  kinetics, 

157471  Interaction  62519  Pathway 

204  Network  2 

Table 1. The Statistics of BIOWAY 
Node 
DNA 
RNA 
Protein 
Complex 
Compound 

5 Translation  35005  Metabolic  196 
2  Reaction 
8 
145966  Catalysis 

5429  Signaling 
5436 
851  Interaction  16649 

10647 

194  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 191-194,  December 2004 

R&D Program of Stemcell Research. 

References 
Bader,  G.D.,  Betel,  D.,  and  Hogue, C.W.  (2003).  BIND: the 
Biomolecular  Interaction  Network  Database.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  31, 248-250. 

Boeckmann,  B.,  Bairoch,  A.,  and  Apweiler,  R.M.  (2003). 
The  SWISS-PROT  protein  knowledgebase  and 
its 
supplement  TrEMBL  in  2003.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  31, 
365-370. 

Clamp,  M.,  Andrews,  D.,  and  Baker,  D.  (2003).  Ensembl 
2002:  accommodating  comparative  genomics.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  31,  38-42. 

Kanehisa,  M.,  Goto,  S.,  Kawashima,  S.,  and  Nakaya,  A. 
(2002).  The  KEGG  databases  at GenomeNet.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  30,  42-46. 

Kim,  M.K.  and  Park,  H.S. 

(2002).  Generalized 
Representation  of metabolic  and  regulatory  pathways. 
Genome Informatics 13, 351-352 

Kim,  M.K.,  Park,  H.S.,  and  Yoo,  S.J.  (2003).  Crosstalk 
between  metabolic  and  regulatory  pathways.  Genome 
informatics 14,  372-373 

van Heiden, J., Naim, A., Lemer, C., Mancuso, R., Eldridge, 
M.,  and  Wodak,  S.J.  (2001).  From  molecular activities 
and  processes to biological function.  Brief Bioinform.  2, 
81-93. 

Wong,  L.  (2002).  Technologies  for  integrating  biological 

data. Brief Bioinform.  3,  389-404. 

Fig.  4.  The  snapshot  of  BIOWAY  interfaces.  Some  of them 
are  standalone  software  tools  developed  for  the  BlOW A Y 
System. 

and  signaling  cascade) would be implemented into the 
system. 

Acknowledgement 

The BIOWAY project has been partially supported by the 
Ministry  of  Information  and  Communication  and  the 
Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea under the 
grant number of IMT2000-ab05 and 21 51  Century Frontier 

