R E V IE W

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  1-4,  March  2011

Post-GWAS  Strategies

Sangsoo  Kim1*  and  Jong  Bhak2

1Department  of  Bioinformatics,  Soongsil  University, 
Seoul  156-743,  Korea,  2Personal  Genomics  Institute, 
Suwon  443-270,  Korea

Abstract

Genome-wide  association  (GWA)  studies  are  the  method 
of  choice  for  discovering  loci  associated  with  common 
diseases.  More  than  a  thousand  GWA  studies  have  re-
ported  successful  identification  of  statistically  significant 
association  signals  in  human  genomes  for  a  variety  of 
complex  diseases.  In  this  review,  I  discuss  some  of  the 
issues  related  to  the  future  of  GWA  studies  and  their  bi-
omedical  applications.

Keywords:  post-GWAS,  personal  genomics,  NGS,  SNP

Introduction

Soon  after  the  completion  of  the  Human  Genome 
Project  that  established  a  reference  human  genome  se-
quence,  a  massive  discovery  of  sequence  variations,  es-
pecially  of  the  type  known  as  single  nucleotide  poly-
morphism  (SNP),  was  initiated  by  the  SNP  Consortium 
(TSC)  (Thorisson  &  Stein,  2003).  After  a  few  years  of  ef-
ficient  international  collaborative  operations,  TSC  was 
succeeded  by  the  International  HapMap  Project,  which 
aims  to  catalog  common  variants  in  our  genomes  and 
investigate  the  linkage  disequilibrium  (LD)  patterns  be-
tween  SNP  markers  (The  International  HapMap  Consor-
tium,  2003).  The  knowledge  on  LD  pattern  and  hap-
lotype  structures  quickly  helped  to  design  high  density 
SNP  chips  for  genome-wide  scanning  of  disease  asso-
ciated  loci  (Wang et al.,  2005).  Commercial  availability  of 
such  SNP  chips  spurred  GWA  studies  of  a  variety  of 
common  diseases  involving  many  genes.  Before  the  ad-
vent  of  GWA  technologies,  the  complex  diseases  were 
studied  by  screening  genetic  association  of  the  variants 
within  or  around  a  few  genes  of  interest,  which  were  se-
lected  based  on  the  researcher’s  prior  knowledge  on 
the  disease  pathogenesis.  Compared  to  this  ‘candidate 
gene  approach’,  the  GWA  approach  does  not  rely  on a 
priori  biological  assumption  and  knowledge  on  the  dis-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  sskimb@ssu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-820-0457,  Fax  +82-2-824-4383
Accepted  7  March  2011

ease  and  thus  has  the  potential  to  detect  novel  disease 
loci,  providing  a  new  insight  and  clues  on  the  disease 
biology.  This  advantage  has  recently  outweighed  its  high 
cost  and  GWA  method  has  become  the  method  of 
choice  for  studying  common  diseases  involving  multiple 
genes.  Public  databases  now  catalog  more  than  a  thou-
sand  GWA  publications  reporting  intriguing  association 
of  novel  genomic  loci  with  complex  diseases  (Hindorff et 
al.,  2009).  With  these  initial  successful  applications  of 
the  GWA  method,  it  is  time  to  plan  the  next  phase  of 
genetic  association  studies,  as  we  now  have  the  second 
wave  of  Next  Generation  Sequencing  (NGS)  tech-
nologies  that  are  much  more  powerful  than  previous 
versions  (Mardis,  2011).  NGS  will  efficiently  facilitate  the 
detection  of  causal  mutations  that  are  hidden  within  the 
LD  blocks  encompassing  the  surrogate  markers  from 
GWAS.  The  1000  Genomes  Project  aims  to  catalog  less 
frequent  SNPs  (~1%  MAF)  from  the  reference  pop-
ulations  (http://www.1000genomes.org).  By  typing  those 
mutations  in  the  study  samples,  one  can  save  the  re-
sequencing  efforts  in  the  follow-up  studies.  It  is  certain 
that  those  studies  involving  the  ethnic  groups  included 
in  the  1000  Genomes  Project  will  benefit  from  the 
project.  However,  what  about  the  populations  not  in-
cluded  in  the  project?  In  this  essay,  we  will  discuss 
some  of  the  issues  concerning  the  nature  and  future  of 
genome-wide  association  study  (GWAS),  followed  by  a 
suggestion  for  the  next  phase  research  strategies.

Nature  of  GWAS  Problems

GWAS  utilizes  high  density  SNP  chips  to  scan  the  ge-
nome-wide  genotype  profiles  of  sample  populations.  The 
present  day  commercial  SNP  chips  typically  include  an 
order  of  million  markers.  In  a  typical  analysis  setting,  the 
genotype-phenotype  association  is  assessed  one  by 
one  for  each  marker.  This  translates  to  millions  of  in-
dependent  statistical  tests.  In  order  to  minimize  false 
positives  due  to  multiple  testing,  one  typically  imposes 
a  very  stringent  cutoff  for  the  statistical  significance 
level.  However,  it  is  still  imaginable  that  some  false  pos-
itives  slip  through  the  threshold.  For  example,  there  are 
a  few  orders  of  magnitude  more  markers  than  samples, 
and  some  peculiar  sampling  may  cause  bias  in  the  pop-
ulation  structure,  causing  spurious  associations.  In  order 
to  overcome  such  problems,  the  results  from  a  GWAS 
are  typically  reexamined  by  a  replication  study  employ-
ing  a  dataset  from  independent  cohorts.  In  general 
strongly  associated  signals  are  well  replicated  in  other 

2    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  1-4,  March  2011

populations,  while  moderate  ones  are  not  so  even  within 
the  same  ethnic  groups.  We  call  the  latter  issue  a  ‘tip 
of  an  iceberg’  problem.  Identification  of  the  hits  of  mod-
erate  signals  tends  to  be  sensitive  to  the  threshold 
setting.  While  the  association  signal  of  a  marker  may  be 
above  the  threshold  in  one  population,  it  may  be  just 
below  the  threshold  in  another  population.  At  the  same 
time,  we  miss  bulk  of  the  genuine  signals  below  the 
threshold.  This  is  similar  to  the  situation  observed  with 
the  ‘tip  of  an  iceberg’.  Besides  the  difficulty  in  repli-
cating  the  original  GWAS  result  in  independent  cohorts, 
small  number  of  strong  signal  observed  in  GWAS  hin-
ders  both  rich  biological  interpretation  of  the  GWAS  re-
sults  and  reasonable  risk  prediction  based  on  geno-
types.  This  posed  a  serious  threat  to  GWAS  and  has 
been  the  basis  of  wide-spread  pessimism  on  the  pros-
pect  of  common  disease  studies.

Missing  Heritability

In  late  2009,  Manolio et al.  published  an  article  critically 
reviewing  the  issue  of  poor  ability  to  explain  phenotypic 
variation  based  on  genotypes  (Manolio et al.,  2009).  One 
of  the  traits  given  as  an  example  in  the  review  article 
was  human  height.  The  genetic  contribution  to  its  varia-
tion  is  known  to  be  around  80%,  while  the  combined  al-
leles  identified  thus  far  explained  only  5%  of  the  pheno-
type  variance,  the  rest  being  claimed  as  missing 
heritability.  The  review  also  speculated  the  potential  fac-
tors  contributing  to  the  missing  heritability.  For  example, 
they  posit  that  rare  or  structural  variants  are  not  well 
represented  in  the  commercial  SNP  chips,  and  that 
modeling  epistatis  of  gene-gene 
in-
corporation  of  environmental  factors  may  be  necessary. 
Besides,  they  also  argued  that  there  may  be  many  more 
weaker  signals  yet  to  be  found.  In  order  to  discover 
them,  much  larger  sample  size  will  be  required.  Yang et 
al.  reported  a  simulation  result  claiming  that  all  the 
SNPs  in  the  GWAS  chip  would  collectively  explain  about 
half  of  the  human  height  variation  (Yang et al.,  2010).  In 
fact,  a  large-scale  meta  analysis  combining  46  data  sets 
comprising  183,727  European  individuals  identified  hun-
dreds  more  variants  related  to  human  height  and  could 
explain  up  to  10%  of  its  variation  (GIANT  Consortium, 
2010).  This  work  confirmed  the  earlier  premise  that  there 
are  many  more  weaker  signals  yet  to  be  found  and  one 
way  to  enhance  the  statistical  power  to  discover  them 
is  by  increasing  the  sample  size.  Although  it  is  a  prom-
ising  option,  not  every  trait  can  be  studied  in  this  way.

interaction  or 

Pathway  Analysis

While  it  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  for  useful  risk  prediction 

based  on  genotypes,  the  hefty  number  of  genes  whose 
genetic  associations  are  newly  identified  by  GWAS  can 
provide  novel  insights  regarding  trait  development  or 
pathogenesis  of  disease  traits.  If  hundreds  of  genes  are 
identified  by  GWAS,  gene  ontology  terms  or  pathways 
enriched  among  them  can  be  identified  in  a  similar  man-
ner  as  well  established  in  gene  expression  profile  analy-
sis  (Huang  et al.,  2009).  This  method  is  not  applicable 
if  only  a  handful  of  genes  are  identified  from  GWAS.  In 
such  cases,  gene-set  analysis  (GSA)  may  be  considered 
(Nam  &  Kim,  2008).  GSA  is  well  established  in  the  area 
of  gene  expression  analysis.  Instead  of  selecting  a  set 
of  genes  passing  a  certain  cutoff  and  looking  for  func-
tional  terms  commonly  shared  by  the  gene  set,  GSA 
checks  a  set-wise  association  score  where  the  con-
tribution  by  all  the  member  genes  in  the  gene-set  are 
summarized  regardless  of  their  significance  level.  It  is 
important  not  to  filter  certain  markers  or  genes  based 
on  their  significance  level.  The  rationale  is  as  follows:  if 
one  wants  to  calculate  a  mean  property  and  removes 
hits  with  low  score  values,  the  mean  would  be  un-
necessarily  inflated.  If  a  biological  pathway  or  functional 
module  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  trait  development, 
its  set-wise  association  score  would  be  significantly 
higher  than  those  of  the  non-associated  groups  (Nam et 
al.,  2010).  Even  if  individual  effect  or  signal  may  not  be 
strong  enough  to  pass  the  threshold,  the  collective  con-
tributions  from  those  genes  may  add  up  to  surpass  the 
random  expectation.  This  approach  offers  a  benefit  of 
reaching  out  the  ‘core  of  an  iceberg’  without  increasing 
the  sample  size.  Recently,  Wang et al.,  2010.  reviewed 
various  computational  methods  that  implemented  path-
way  analysis  approach  for  GWAS  (Wang  et al.,  2010). 
They  suggest  that  pathway  analysis  may  allow  rich  de-
scription  of  the  biological  mechanism  behind  the  trait 
development  in  an  unprecedented  manner  and  has  the 
potential  to  suggest  therapeutic  or  diagnostic  targets 
without  delving  into  the  specific  identification  of  causal 
variants.  Eric  Lander,  in  his  review  of  celebrating  tenth 
anniversary  of  human  genome  sequencing,  also  illus-
trated  several  successful  examples  along  this  line  where 
GWAS  help  to  advance  the  biomedical  applications 
(Lander,  2011).
    If  the  biological  mechanisms  are  common  for  the 
same  traits  regardless  of  populations,  GSA  would  yield 
highly  replicating  results,  even  in  the  cases  where  in-
dividual  markers  do  not  show  correlative  association 
across  different  populations.  It  would  be  interesting  to 
see  whether  this  is  indeed  the  case  with  multi-pop-
ulation  meta  analysis  data  sets.  It  is  also  informative  to 
know  to  what  extent  of  ethnic  groups  we  would  expect 
that  GSA  give  overlapping  results.  For  example,  may 
such  a  high  overlap  be  expected  within  Asian  pop-

ulations  only  or  even  among  Asian  and  Europeans?
    Now  there  are  even  bolder  approaches  that  intend  to 
integrate  systems  biology  to  genetics,  called  systems 
genetics  (Butte et al.,  2011).  Instead  of  scoring  a  collec-
tive  association  of  a  predefined  set  of  genes,  this  new 
approach  tests  the  association  of  protein  interaction  or 
gene  regulatory  networks.  While  the  two  approaches 
may  look  similar,  there  is  an  important  distinction.  The 
former  mainly  relies  on  evidence  collected  from  liter-
ature,  and  thus  of  highly  reliable,  but  their  coverage  is 
rather  low  and  the  interaction  context  between  genes 
are  missing  for  some  gene  sets  such  as  those  based  on 
gene  ontology  or  molecular  signatures.  The  latter  may 
have  the  advantage  of  testing  network  properties  that 
are  likely  dependent  on  the  context  of  the  trait,  facili-
tated  by  the  integration  of  various  omics  profiling  data.

Longitudinal  Cohorts

Tom  Hudson,  President  and  Scientific  Director,  Ontario 
Institute  for  Cancer  Research,  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada, 
wrote  in  an  essay  celebrating  tenth  anniversary  of  ge-
nome  sequencing  that  he  would  invest  heavily  in  devel-
oping  large  clinical  resources  if  he  could  move  the  clock 
back  to  2001  when  the  initial  draft  of  the  human 
“reference”  genome  sequence  was  published  (Hudson, 
2011).  Once  integrated  with  genomic  technologies  the 
cohorts  annotated  with  ten  years  of  detailed  clinical  his-
tory  would  have  profound  effect  in  understanding  dis-
ease  progression.

Personal  Genomics

Introduction  of  NGS  technologies  has  sparked  the  ge-
nome  sequencing  of  individuals  (Nature  Editorial,  2010). 
There  are  now  several  so-called  personal  genome  proj-
ects,  such  as  the  1000  Genomes  Project  and  the  Perso-
nal  Genome  Project  (http://www.personalgenomes.org). 
In  the  era  of  personal  genomics,  what  would  be  the  fu-
ture  of  GWAS?  Some  think  that  GWAS  will  be  super-
seded  by  variant  profiling  based  on  NGS.  Certainly  high 
penetrant,  monogenic,  Mendelian  diseases  would  benefit 
greatly  from  NGS,  where  comparative  sequencing  of  af-
fected  and  unaffected  from  the  closely  related  families 
would  reveal  the  disease  mutations.  On  the  other  hand, 
common,  complex  diseases  require  a  large  number  of 
unrelated  population  samples  to  locate  the  statistically 
confident  disease-causing  loci.  The  current  NGS  tech-
nologies  are  too  expensive  to  replace  the  traditional 
SNP  chips  in  population  genotyping.  In  addition,  com-
putational  cost  and  time  for  handling  whole  genome 
NGS  data  for  the  large  number  of  samples  required  in 
GWAS  would  be  prohibitive  at  the  moment  and  within 

Post-GWAS  Strategies    3

the  foreseeable  future.  Ideally  sequencing  technology 
can  detect  novel  mutations  and  profile  known  variants  in 
one  shot.  However,  a  two  step  process  would  be  more 
practical:  (1)  discovering  novel  mutations  by  sequencing; 
(2)  follow-up  genotyping  of  the  variants  by  chip  tech-
nology.  One  of  the  aims  of  the  1000  Genomes  Project 
is  to  provide  reference  variant  profiles  for  HapMap 
populations.  For  a  given  GWAS,  one  can  look  up  the 
database  to  pick  up  the  potential  variants  within  the  LD 
block  of  the  association  signals.  The  common-dis-
ease/common-variant  hypothesis  tells  that  if  a  dis-
ease-causing  mutation  has  occurred  one  time  in  human 
history  at  a  certain  haplotype,  it  would  be  inherited  by 
the  descendants  who  carry  the  haplotype.  On  the  other 
hand,  those  who  do  not  carry  this  haplotype  would  be 
unaffected  by  the  disease.  While  subsequent  recombi-
nation  would  diversify  the  overall  haplotype  structure, 
the  core  haplotype  around  the  disease-causing  variant 
would  be  conserved.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  identify 
the  haplotypes  associated  with  the  trait  of  interest 
through  GWAS  and  to  infer  the  potential  disease-caus-
ing  variants  from  the  NGS  data  that  match  those 
haplotypes.  The  success  of  this  approach  is  then  de-
pendent  on  whether  the  1000  Genomes  Project  covers 
the  samples  whose  haplotype  structures  are  compatible 
with  those  of  our  GWAS  subjects.  At  the  moment,  the 
1000  Genomes  Project  is  partially  complete  and  we 
need 
for 
non-HapMap  population  GWAS.
    If  we  focus  our  attention  to  Korean  GWAS  issues, 
several  options  can  be  suggested.  Since  Korea  is  geo-
graphically  between  China  and  Japan  and  genetically  al-
so  Koreans  are  in  between  Chinese  and  Japanese  pop-
ulations,  we  can  wait  until  the  1000  Genomes  Project 
produce  sufficiently  accurate  and  useful  data  for  both 
Chinese  and  Japanese  populations.  Alternatively,  we 
can  pursue  producing  Korean  reference  whole  genome 
sequences,  for  which  the  sampling  object  should  be  to 
maximize  the  genetic  diversity  among  Koreans.  The  ex-
isting  GWAS  genotype  data  would  facilitate  such  a  sam-
ple  selection  process.  In  fact  these  two  options  are  not 
mutually  exclusive,  rather  complementary.  For  example, 
comparison  of  Korean  reference  genomes  with  those 
from  the  Chinese  and  Japanese  of  the  1000  Genomes 
Project  would  tell  us  how  much  reference  sequencing 
among  Koreans  is  necessary.

to  wait  more 

to  answer 

this  question 

Conclusions

There  has  been  widely  known  and  somewhat  accepted 
skepticism  on  GWAS.  However,  the  recent  progresses 
re-shed  light  on  its  potential.  Recently  NIH  and  NCI, 
USA  funded  several  projects  called  the  Post-GWA 

4    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  1-4,  March  2011

Initiative  (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA- 
CA-09-002.html).  These  projects  (Monteiro et al.,  2010), 
focusing  on  GWA  studies  of  cancers,  follow  up  the 
GWAS  outcomes  to  pin-point  the  causal  variants  and 
understand  how  they  influence  disease  development 
and  progression.  Bioinformatic  computational 
tools 
would  play  important  roles  in  prioritizing  the  potential 
causal  variants  through  the  prediction  of  the  functional 
consequence  of  each  variant  and  the  analysis  of  the  af-
fected  pathways.  Experimental  validations  employing 
both  omics  profiling  and  animal  models  are  also  planned. 
Much  of  the  idea  laid  out  in  the  projects  share  the  same 
spirit  with  this  essay.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  Basic  Science  Research 
Program  through  the  National  Research  Foundation  of 
Korea  (NRF)  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Education, 
Science  and  Technology  (NRF-2010-0021811). 

References

Butte,  A.,  Califano,  A.,  Friend,  S.,  Ideker,  T.,  and  Schadt,  E. 
(2011).  Integrative  Network-based  Association  Studies: 
Leveraging  cell  regulatory  models  in  the  post-GWAS  era. 
Nature Precedings  doi:10.1038/npre.2011.5732.1

GIANT  Consortium.  (2010).  Hundreds  of  variants  clustered 
in  genomic  loci  and  biological  pathways  affect  human 
height.  Nature  467,  832-838.

Hindorff,  L.A.,  Sethupathy,  P.,  Junkins,  H.A.,  Ramos,  E.M., 
Mehta,  J.P.,  Collins,  F.S.,  and  Manolio,  T.A.  (2009). 
Potential  etiologic  and  functional  implications  of  ge-
nome-wide  association  loci  for  human  diseases  and 
traits.  Proc. Natl. Acad Sci. USA  106,  9362-9367.

Huang,  D.W.,  Sherman,  B.T.,  and  Lempicki,  R.A.  (2009). 
Systematic  and  integrative  analysis  of  large  gene  lists  us-
ing  DAVID  Bioinformatics  Resources.  Nat.  Protoc.  4, 
44-57.

Hudson,  T. 

(2011).  Genomics  and  Clinical  Relevance. 

Science  331,  547.

Lander,  E.S.  (2011).  Initial  impact  of  the  sequencing  of  the 

human  genome.  Nature  470,  187-197.

Manolio,  T.A.,  Collins,  F.S.,  Cox,  N.J.,  Goldstein,  D.B., 
Hindorff,  L.A.,  Hunter,  D.J.,  McCarthy,  M.I.,  Ramos,  E.M., 
Cardon,  L.R.,  Chakravarti,  A.,  Cho,  J.H.,  Guttmacher, 
A.E.,  Kong,  A.,  Kruglyak,  L.,  Mardis,  E.,  Rotimi,  C.N., 
Slatkin,  M.,  Valle,  D.,  Whittemore,  A.S.,  Boehnke,  M., 
Clark,  A.G.,  Eichler,  E.E.,  Gibson,  G.,  Haines,  J.L., 
Mackay,  T.F.,  McCarroll,  S.A.,  and  Visscher,  P.M.  (2009). 
Finding  the  missing  heritability  of  complex  diseases. 
Nature  461,  747-753.

Mardis,  E.R.  (2011).  A  decade’s  perspective  on  DNA  se-

quencing  technology.  Nature  470,  198-203.

Monteiro,  A.N.A.,  Coetzee,  G.A.,  Freedman,  M.L.,  Biasi, 
M.D.,  Casey,  G.,  Duggan,  D.,  Risch,  A.,  Plass,  C.,  Liu, 
P.,  James,  M.,  Vikis,  H.G.,  Tichelaar,  J.W.,  You,  M., 
Gayther,  S.A.,  and  Mills,  I.G.  (2010).  Principles  for  the 
post-GWAS  functional  characterisation  of  risk  loci. Nature 　
Precedings.  doi:10.1038/npre.2010.  5162.

Nam,  D.,  Kim,  J.,  Kim,  S.Y.,  and  Kim,  S.  (2010).  GSA-SNP: 
a  general  approach  for  gene  set  analysis  of  poly-
morphisms.  Nucl. Acids Res.  38,  749-754.

Nam,  D.,  Kim,  S.Y.,  Gene-set  approach  for  expression  pat-

tern  analysis.  (2008).  Brief Bioinform.  9,  189-197.

Nature  Editorial.  (2010).  The  human  genome  at  ten.  Nature 

464,  649-650.

The 

International  HapMap  Consortium. 

(2003).  The 

International  HapMap  Project.  Nature  426,  789-796. 

Thorisson,  G.A.,  and  Stein,  L.D.  (2003).  The  SNP  Consor-
tium  website:  past,  present  and  future.  Nucl. Acids Res. 
31,  124-127.

Wang,  K.,  Li,  M.,  and  Hakonarson,  H.  (2010).  Analysing  bio-
logical  pathways  in  Genome-wide  association  studies. 
Nat. Rev. Genet.  11,  843-854.

Wang,  W.Y.,  Barratt,  B.J.,  Clayton,  D.G.,  and  Todd,  J.A. 
(2005).  Genome-wide  association  studies:  theoretical  and 
practical  concerns.  Nat. Rev. Genet.  6,  109-118.

Yang,  J.,  Benyamin,  B.,  McEvoy,  B.P.,  Gordon,  S., 
Henders,  A.K.,  Nyholt,  D.R.,  Madden,  P.A.,  Heath,  A.C., 
Martin,  N.G.,  Montgomery,  G.W.,  Goddard,  M.E.,  and 
Visscher,  P.M.  (2010).  Common  SNPs  explain  a  large 
proportion  of  the  heritability  for  human  height.  Nat. 
Genet.  42,  565-569.

