Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  39-43,  March  2011

MiRPI:  Portable  Software  to  Identify  Conserved  miRNAs, 
Targets  and  to  Calculate  Precursor  Statistics

Dhandapani  Vignesh1¶,  Paul  Parameswari1¶,  Su 
Bin  Im1,  Hae  Jin  Kim2  and  Yong  Pyo  Lim1*

1Molecular  Genetics  and  Genomics  Laboratory,  College 
of  Agriculture  and  Life  sciences,  Chungnam  National 
University,  Daejeon  305-764,  Korea,  2Ensoltek  Co.,  LTD, 
Daejeon  305-510,  Korea

Abstract

MicroRNAs  (miRNAs)  are  recently  discovered  small  RNA 
molecules  usually  resulting  in  translational  repression 
and  gene  silencing.  Despite  the  fact  that  specific  cloning 
of  small  RNA’s  is  a  method  in  practice,  computational 
identification  of  miRNA’s  has  been  a  major  focus  recent 
days,  since  is  a  rapid  process  following  AB  initio  and 
sequence  alignment  methods.  Here  we  developed  new 
software  called  MiRPI  that  aims  to  identify  the  highly 
conserved  miRNAs  without  any  mismatches  from  given 
fasta  formatted  gene  sequences  by  using  non-repeated 
miRNA  dataset  of  the  user’s  interest.  The  new  window 
embedded  with  the  software  is  used  to  identify  the  tar-
gets  for  inputted  mature  miRNAs  in  the  mRNA  sequen-
ces.  Also  MiRPI  is  designed  to  measure  the  precursor 
miRNA  statistics,  majorly  focusing  the  Adjusted  Mini-
mum  Folding  free  Energy  (AMFE)  and  Minimum  Folding 
free  Energy  Index  (MFEI),  the  most  important  parame-
ters  in  miRNA  confirmation.  MiRPI  is  developed  by 
PERL  (Practical  Extraction  and  Report  Language)  and  Tk 
(Tool  kit  widgets)  scripting  languages.  It  is  user  friendly, 
portable  offline  software  that  works  in  all  windows  OS, 
sized  to  3  MB.

Availability:  http://code.google.com/p/mirpi

Keywords:  miRNA,  portable  software,  MiRPI,  miRNA  tar-
gets

Introduction

MicroRNAs  (miRNAs)  are  newly  discovered  class  of  non- 
coding  small  RNAs  that  are  generally  18∼24  nucleo-

¶Authors  are  equally  contributed.
*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yplim@cnu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-42-8215739,  Fax  +82-42-8218847
Accepted  10  March  2011

tides  in  length,  that  regulate  gene  and  protein  ex-
pression  in  plants  and  animals  (Bartel,  2004;  2009). 
They  were  first  described  in  the  year  1993  by  Lee  RC 
and  his  colleagues,  and  the  term  miRNA  was  coined  in 
later  2001  (Ruvkun,  2001).  MiRNA’s  have  so  far  been 
identified  mostly  by  specific  cloning  of  small  RNA  mole-
cules,  complemented  by  computational  methods.  MiRNA 
are  partially  complementary  to  one  or  more  messenger 
RNA  (mRNA)  molecules,  and  function  to  downregulate 
the  gene  expression  in  a  variety  of  manners,  including 
translational  repression,  mRNA  cleavage,  and  deadeny-
lation.  MiRNA  genes  reside  in  regions  of  the  genome  as 
distinct  transcriptional  units,  in  clusters  of  polycistronic 
units  -  carrying  the  information  of  several  miRNAs 
(Lagos-Quintana,  2001).  Studies  suggest  that  approx-
imately  half  of  the  known  miRNA  inhabit  in  non-protein 
coding  RNAs  (intron  and  extron)  or  within  the  intron  of 
protein  coding  genes  (Rodriguez,  2004).  RNA  polymer-
ase  II  transcribes  miRNA  genes,  producing  long  primary 
transcripts  (pri-miRNAs)  (Kim,  2005).  However,  the  proc-
ess  to  yield  mature  miRNAs  involves  two  steps  involving 
RNase-III  enzymes  and  companion  double-stranded 
RNA-binding  domain  (dsRBD)  proteins.  Researches  sug-
gest  that  about  one-third  of  the  human  genes  are  possi-
bly  regulated  by  miRNAs  (Lim,  2003).  This  occurs  when 
mature  miRNAs  couples  with  a  multiple-protein  nuclease 
complex  called  the  RNA-induced  silencing  complex 
(RISC).  Once  incorporated  into  a  RISC,  the  miRNA  is 
positioned  to  regulate  the  target  genes  by  degradation 
of  the  mRNA  through  direct  cleavage  or  by  inhibiting 
protein  synthesis.  MiRNAs  can  bind  to  sequences  on 
the  target  mRNAs  by  exact  or  near-exact  comple-
mentary  base  pairing  and  thereby  direct  cleavage  and 
destruction  of  the  mRNA  (Rhoades,  2002)  similar  to  the 
mechanism  employed  in  RNA  interference  (RNAi),  the 
cleavage  of  a  single  phosphodiester  bond  on  the  target 
mRNA  occurs  between  bases  10  and  11  (Elbashir et al., 
2001).  In  contrast,  nearly  all  animal  miRNAs  studied  so 
far  are  usually  not  exactly  complementary  to  their 
mRNA  targets,  and  seem  to  inhibit  protein  synthesis 
while  retaining  the  stability  of  the  mRNA  target  (Ambros, 
2004).  It  has  been  suggested  that  transcripts  may  be 
regulated  by  multiple  miRNAs  and  an  individual  miRNA 
may  target  numerous  transcripts.
    MiRNA  identification  is  an  essential  requirement  for 
understanding  the  mechanisms  of  post-transcriptional 
regulation.  Consequently  the  prediction  of  the  potential 
targets  also  becomes  an  essential  parameter  in  the  un-

40    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  39-43,  March  2011

derstanding  cleavage  and  destruction  mechanism 
(Rhoades et al.,  2002).  In  this  study  we  developed  new 
software  MiRPI  to  identify  the  highly  conserved  miRNAs 
without  any  mismatches,  their  targets  and  also  to  calcu-
late  the  statistics  of  precursor  miRNAs.  Statistical  analy-
ses  of  predicted  precursor  miRNA,  like  MFEI,  AMFE  are 
one  of  the  most  important  factors  to  confirm  the  miRNA 
through  precursor  secondary  structure  analysis.  MiRPI  is 
portable  software  that  means  a  computer  program 
which  is  able  to  run  independently  without  the  in-
stallation  of  any  files  for  its  use.  Functions  and  im-
portance  of  the  software  MiRPI  is  described  further.

Methods

Interface

MiRPI  has  a  user  friendly  interface  with  easy  workflow 
for  biologist.  It’s  structured  into  three  windows  (Fig.  1), 
the  main  window  was  designed  for  identification  of 
miRNAs  with  two  upload  buttons  for  gene  sequences 
file  and  non-repeated  miRNAs  file.  In  the  second  win-
dow,  statistics  of  precursor  can  be  measured  by  up-
loading 
file  and  Minimum 
Folding  free  Energy  (MFE)  values  file.  Additionally,  it’s 
also  possible  to  identify  the  targets  by  inputting  mRNA 
sequence  file  and  identified  miRNAs  in  separate  file  in 

the  precursor  sequence 

the  third  window.  The  detailed  workflow  of  MiRPI  is  ex-
plained  in  Fig.  2.  The  current  version  of  MiRPI  was  de-
veloped  by  using  Perl/Tk.

Input

it  as 

in  excel  sheet  and  save 

MiRNA  identification  window  has  options  to  upload  two 
sequence  files,  one  for  gene  sequences  and  another  for 
miRNAs  file,  using  the  submitted  mature  miRNAs  the 
software  finds  miRNA  gene  sequence  from  the  inputted 
gene  sequences.  MFE  values  must  be  calculated  by  ex-
ternal  software  and  should  be  organized  into  separated 
lines,  for  easy  arrangement  copy  all  the  MFE  values  in 
one  column 
text 
document.  Equal  number  of  MFE  values  and  sequences 
must  be  given  in  the  input  files  since  MiRPI  assumes 
the  first  MFE  value  of  the  input  file  as  the  first  se-
quence’s  value  and  uses  for  further  analysis.  Target 
identification  window  also  requires  two  input  files,  one 
with  mRNA  sequences  as  target  and  the  other  with 
identified  mature  miRNAs.  Gene,  mRNA  (for  targets), 
and  miRNA  sequence  files  must  contain  the  symbols 
“＞”,  “/”  at  the  end  of  each  file  in  separate  lines.  This 
helps  to  read  the  sequences  quickly  and  proceed  to  the 
next  process.  MiRPI  only  accepts  fasta  formatted  se-
quence  file,  also  the  sequence  description  line  must 
contain  the  accession  number  in  between  first  thirteen 

Fig.  1.  Screenshot  represents  the  structure  of  the  software  and  results  which  analyzed.

MiRPI:  Portable  Software  to  Identify  Conserved  miRNAs,  Targets  and  to  Calculate  Precursor  Statistics    41

letters.  After  the  first  and  second  space  in  the  fasta  de-
scription  line  will  recognize  as  an  organisms  full  name. 
In  the  case  of  mRNA  sequence  file  after  the  third  space 
will  read  as  target  information.  For  example  the  input 
sequence  file  must  be  given  as  default  GenBank,  NCBI 
fasta  formats  as  follows  ＞gi|168828718|gb|EU482897.1| 

Pinus pinaster  R2R3-Myb14  transcription  factor  (Myb14) 
gene.

Results  and  Discussion

MiRPI  identifies  the  highly  conserved  mature  miRNA  se-

Fig.  2.  The  workflow  explains  the  process  of  MiRPI  software. 

42    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  39-43,  March  2011

quences  of  the  user’s  interest  without  any  mismatches 
against  the  given  input  gene  sequence  file  with  highly 
trustable  data.  We  utilized  MiRPI  for  internal  research  to 
test  the  sample  data  which  were  downloaded  from  pub-
lic  databases  such  as  National  Centre  for  Biotechnology 
Information  (NCBI)  and  plant  miRNA  database  (PMRD) 
(Zhang  et al.,  2010).  The  output  retrieves  required  in-
formation  and  frames  into  columns  as  follows,  the  gene 
id,  their  length,  matching  miRNA  id,  start  and  end  posi-
tion,  strand,  and  conserved  mature  miRNA  sequence. 
The  total  counts  of  identified  miRNA  were  displayed  at 
the  end.
    Calculation  of  precursor  miRNA  statistics  for  larger 
data  set  manually  is  a  time  consuming  process  and 
hence  we  included  the  MFE  statistics  calculator  in  the 
tool.  Outcomes  of  precursor  statistics  calculator  consist 
the  precursor  length,  counts  of  each  base  pair  (A,  T,  G, 
and  C),  percentage  of  each  four  bases,  percentage  of 
AT  and  GC,  given  MFE  value,  AMFE,  and  MFEI  in  tab 
delimitation  format.  MFEI  and  AMFE  calculation  formulas 
(Fig.  3)  were  utilized  as  described  by  Zhang  and  their 
team  (2009).  This  mainly  helps  in  the  confirmation  of 
precursor  miRNA  in  secondary  structure  analysis.  Tar-
gets  were  checked  with  plant  mRNA  sequences  which 
were  downloaded  from  NCBI  GenBank  (www.ncbi.nlm. 
nih.gov/genbank)  database  and  miRNAs  from  PMR  da-
tabase  (Zhang et al.,  2010).  Identified  target  results  were 
outlined  into  seven  columns,  and  organized  as  follows 
miRNA  id,  target  gene  id,  target,  start  and  end  position 
of  mature  miRNA,  strand,  and  compliment  mature 
miRNA  sequences  which  binds  to  identified  miRNA.  The 
results  were  compared  with  the  published  data  and 
verified.
    Efficiency  of  the  tool  was  evaluated  with  standard  ex-
ample  sets  of  data  which  were  downloaded  from  the 
NCBI  database  and  plant  miRNA  database  (Zhang  et 
al.,  2010).  Overlapping  miRNAs  were  removed  by  in 
home  developed  scripts  and  resulted  1191  non-repeated 
mature  miRNAs.  All  these  miRNAs  are  searched  against 
all  plants  gene  sequences  by  MiRPI  software  and  re-
trieved  2163  miRNAs,  they  are  accessible  at  http://168. 
188.15.78/db/all_miRNA.  Outcome  of  each  analysis  was 
framed  into  simple  structure  for  easy  understand  and 
documentation,  which  are  separated  by  tab  delimitation 
into  a  column  (Fig.  1).  All  the  results  can  be  saved  in 

Fig.  3.  Formulas  used  for  calculating  Adjusted  Minimum 
Folding  free  Energy  (AMFE)  and  Minimum  Folding  free 
Energy  Index  (MFEI).

a  text  document  or  copied  to  excel  sheet  for  better 
understanding.

Conclusion

MIRPI  is  user  friendly,  fast  and  accurate  software  devel-
oped  by  using  the  PERL  and  Tk.  miRNAs  and  their  tar-
gets  were  identified  for  more  than  100,000  plant  se-
quences  against  1,000  plant  miRNAs  using  MiRPI.  It  is 
open  source  portable  software  that  can  be  used  in  all 
windows  Operating  systems.  MiRPI  successfully  identi-
fies  the  miRNAs  from  the  given  gene  sequences,  targets 
from  mRNA  sequence  and  calculates  the  statistics  for 
submitted  MFE  and  precursor  sequences.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  carried  out  under  “Human  Resource 
Development  Center 
for  Economic  Region  Leading 
Industry”  project  (Project  No.  2010-1228),  supported  by 
the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  &  Technology  (MEST) 
and  the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea(NRF). 
Also  the  research  was  partially  supported  by  Chinese 
Cabbage  Molecular  Marker  Research  Center  (CMRC), 
grants  for  the  Technology  Development  Program  for 
Agriculture  and  Forestry  (Grant  No.  607003-05),  Ministry 
of  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Fisheries,  Republic  of  Korea. 

References

Ambros,  V.  (2004).  The  functions  of  animal  microRNAs. 

Nature  431,  350-355.

Bartel,  D.P. 

(2004).  MicroRNAs:  genomics,  biogenesis, 

mechanism,  and  function.  Cell  116,  281-297.

Bartel,  D.P.  (2009).  MicroRNAs:  target  recognition  and  regu-

latory  functions.  Cell  136,  215-233.

Elbashir,  S.M.,  Lendeckel.  W.,  and  Tuschl,  T.  (2001).  RNA 
interference  is  mediated  by  21  and  22  nt  RNAs. Genes & 
Development.  15,  188-200.

Kim,  V.N.  (2005).  MicroRNA  biogenesis:  coordinated  crop-

ping  and  dicing.  Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  6,  376-385.

Lee,  R.C.,  Feinbaum,  R.L.,  and  Ambros,  V.  (1993).  The 
Caenorhabditis elegans heterochronic  gene  lin-4  encodes 
small  RNAs  with  antisense  complementarity  to  lin-14. 
Cell 75,  843-854.

Lim,  L.P.,  Lau,  N.C.,  and  Weinstein,  E.G.  (2003).  The 
microRNAs  of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genes & Develop-
ment  17,  991-1008.

Lim,  L.P.,  Matthew,  W.,  Rhoades,  M.W.,  Reinhart,  B.J., 
Burge,  C.B.,  Bartel,  B.,  and  Bartel,  D.P.  (2002).  Predic-
tion  of  plant  MicroRNA  targets.  Cell  110,  513-520.

Quintana,  M.L.,  Rauhut,  R.,  Lendeckel,  W.,  and  Tuschl,  T. 
(2001).  Identification  of  novel  genes  coding  for  small  ex-
pressed  RNAs.  Science  294,  853-858.

Rhoades,  M.W.,  Reinhart,  B.J.,  Lim,  L.  P.,  Burge,  C.  B., 
Bartel,  B.,  and  Bartel,  D.  P.  (2002).  Prediction  of  plant 

MiRPI:  Portable  Software  to  Identify  Conserved  miRNAs,  Targets  and  to  Calculate  Precursor  Statistics    43

microRNA  targets.  Cell  110,  513-520.

Rodriguez,  A.,  Jones,  S.G.,  Ashurt,  J.L.,  and  Bradley,  A. 
(2004). 
Identification  of  Mammalian  microRNA  Host 
Genes  and  Transcription  Units.  Genome Research  14, 
1902-1910.

Ruvkun,  G.  (2001).  Molecular  Biology:  Glimpses  of  a  Tiny 

RNA  World.  Science 294,  797-799.

Zhang,  B.,  Stellwag,  E.J.,  and  Pan,  X.  (2009).  Large-scale 
genome  analysis  reveals  unique  features  of  miRNAs. 
Gene.  443,  100-109.

Zhang,  Z.,  Yu,  J.,  Li,  D.,  Zhang,  Z.,  Liu,  F.,  Zhou,  X.,  Wang, 
T.,  Ling,  Yi.,  and  Su,  Z.  (2010).  PMRD:  plant  microRNA 
database.  Nucl. Acids Res. 38(suppl  1),  D806-813.

