APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  153-156,  September  2008

StrokeBase:  A  Database  of  Cerebrovascular  Disease-related 
Candidate  Genes

Young-Uk  Kim1*,  Il-Hyun  Kim1,  Ok-Sun  Bang2 
and  Young-Joo  Kim1

1Medical  Genomics  Research  Center,  KRIBB,  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea,  2Department  of  Medical  Research, 
KIOM,  Daejeon  305-810,  Korea

the  ongoing  database  efficiently  supports  medical  and 
genetic  research  in  order  to  overcome  cerebrovascular 
disease.

Availability:  StrokeBase  is  freely  available  at  http:// 
sysbio.kribb.re.kr:8080/stroke/.

Abstract

Complex  diseases  such  as  stroke  and  cancer  have  two 
or  more  genetic  loci  and  are  affected  by  environmental 
factors  that  contribute  to  the  diseases.  Due  to  the  com-
plex  characteristics  of  these  diseases,  identifying  candi-
date  genes  requires  a  system-level  analysis  of  the  fol-
lowing:  gene  ontology,  pathway,  and  interactions.  A  da-
tabase  and  user  interface,  termed  StrokeBase,  was  de-
veloped;  StrokeBase  provides  queries  that  search  for 
pathways,  candidate  genes,  candidate  SNPs,  and  gene 
networks.  The  database  was  developed  by  using  in  sili-
co  data  mining  of  HGNC,  ENSEMBL,  STRING,  RefSeq, 
UCSC,  GO,  HPRD,  KEGG,  GAD,  and  OMIM.  Forty  can-
didate  genes  that  are  associated  with  cerebrovascular 
disease  were  selected  by  human  experts  and  public 
databases.  The  networked  cerebrovascular  disease  gene 
maps  also  were  developed;  these  maps  describe  gene- 
gene  interactions  and  biological  pathways.  We  identified 
1127  genes,  related  indirectly  to  cerebrovascular  dis-
ease  but  directly  to  the  etiology  of  cerebrovascular 
disease.  We  found  that  a  protein-protein  interaction 
(PPI)  network  that  was  associated  with  cerebrovascular 
disease  follows  the  power-law  degree  distribution  that  is 
evident  in  other  biological  networks.  Not  only  was  in  sili-
co  data  mining  utilized,  but  also  250K  Affymetrix  SNP 
chips  were  utilized  in  the  320  control/disease  associa-
tion  study  to  generate  associated  markers  that  were 
pertinent  to  the  cerebrovascular  disease  as  a  ge-
nome-wide  search.  The  associated  genes  and  the  genes 
that  were  retrieved  from  the  in  silico  data  mining  system 
were  compared  and  analyzed.  We  developed  a  well-cu-
rated  cerebrovascular  disease-associated  gene  network 
and  provided  bioinformatic  resources  to  cerebrovascular 
disease  researchers.  This  cerebrovascular  disease  net-
work  can  be  used  as  a  frame  of  systematic  genomic  re-
search,  applicable  to  other  complex  diseases.  Therefore, 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yjkim8@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8127,  Fax  +82-42-879-8119
Accepted  9  September  2008

Keywords:  stroke,  cerebrovascular  disease,  SNP,  dis-
ease  gene,  association  study

Introduction

Cerebrovascular  disease  is  the  third-leading  cause  of 
death,  behind  heart  disease  and  cancer  (Toole.  1999). 
Complex  disorders  such  as  stroke  and  cancer  have  two 
or  more  genetic  loci  and  environmental  factors  that  con-
tribute  to  the  diseases  (Braunwald  et al.,  2001;  Jin  et 
al.,  2008).  The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  provide  a 
systematic  approach  to  analyze  the  complex  effects  of 
genes  and  to  represent  the  frame  of  their  relationships 
with  specific  diseases.  To  discover  candidate  genes  that 
are  related  to  complex  disease,  open  sources,  such  as 
Entrez  Pubmed,  OMIM,  PathwayStudio,  HPRD,  and 
Gencards,  were  thoroughly  utilized,  resulting  in  a  vast 
amount  of  genetic  and  pathway  information  with  regard 
to  the  etiology  of  cerebrovascular  disease.  These  genes 
were  annotated  to  access  information  on  transcription, 
translation,  structural  function,  and  relatedness  to  the 
disease.  In  addition  to  in  silico  data  mining,  320  250K 
Affymetrix  SNP  chips  (GeneChipTM  Human  Mapping 
250K  Nsp  Array,  Affymetrix,  Inc.,  CA)  were  utilized  for  a 
case/control  association  study 
to  generate  experi-
mentally  associated  markers  of  cerebrovascular  disease. 
The  associated  genes  from  the  SNP  chips  and  the 
genes  that  were  retrieved  from  in  silico  data  mining  sys-
tems  were  compared  and  analyzed.  A  protein-protein 
network  diagram  that  showed  the  integrated  markers 
and  their  relationships  was  constructed  in  order  to  ana-
lyze  the  network  characteristics  and  produce  hub  genes. 
It  was  found  that  the  PPI  network  that  was  associated 
with  cerebrovascular  disease  follows  a  power-law  de-
gree  distribution,  as  other  biological  networks  do  (Peri et 
al.,  2003).  The  PathwayStudio  5.0  program  (Ariadne, 
Inc.,  MD,  USA)  was  utilized  to  process  the  natural  text 
mining  of  PubMed  abstracts;  the  use  of  PathwayStudio 
resulted  in  a  gene-disease  association  network.  The  eti-
ology  of  the  disease  and  its  related  genes,  which  were 
extracted  from  in  silico  data  mining  and  network  analy-

154    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  153-156,  September  2008

sis  as  well  as  from  genome-wide  association  studies, 
were  accumulated  to  the  web-based  portal  database 
named  StrokeBase  (http://sysbio.kribb.re.kr:8080/stroke/) 
(Fig.  1).  Information  in  this  integrated  cerebrovascular 
disease  network  may  serve  as  a  frame  for  systematic 
genomic  research  for  cerebrovascular  diseases,  as  well 
as  for  other  complex  diseases  such  as  cancers. 

Utility  and  Discussion

In  order  to  map  SNPs  to  disease-related  genes,  the 
chromosomal  position  of  gene  boundaries  was  retrieved 
from  KnownGene,  a  program  that  provides  information 
on  protein-coding  genes  based  on  proteins  from  Uniprot 
with  their  corresponding  mRNAs  from  GenBank.  To  link 
KnownGenes  with  gene  symbols  from  OMIM  and  GAD, 
UCSC’s  table  kgXref  (“known  genes  to  external  refer-
ence”)  was  used. 
    A  database  was  developed  by  in  silico  data  mining 
using  HGNC,  ENSEMBL,  STRING,  RefSeq,  UCSC,  GO, 
HPRD,  KEGG,  GAD,  and  OMIM  (Fig.  1B).  The  Tomcat 
web  server  was  utilized  in  StrokeBase,  which  simplifies 
building  user  interfaces  for  JSP  (Java  Server  Page). 
Genes  that  were  noted  in  Morbid  Map  (OMIM  Mor-
bidMap;  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/getmorbid.cgi) 
and  the  Genetic  Association  Database  (GAD;  http:// 

geneticassociationdb.nih.gov/)  were  selected  (Hamosh et 
al.,  2002).  To  cover  up-to-date  experimental  results,  a 
literature  search  also  was  performed  by  biologists. 
Because  genes  are  noted  by  their  various  aliases,  we 
mapped  the  gene  set  to  the  HUGO  Gene  Nomenclature 
Committee  (HGNC,  http://www.genenames.org/)  to  re-
tain  consistency  of  gene  entries.  We  identified  1127 
genes  that  were  indirectly  related  to  cerebrovascular 
disease  but  directly  related  to  the  etiology  of  cere-
brovascular  disease.  The  Pathway  overview  page  has 
the  list  of  signaling  pathways  that  are  related  to  cere-
brovascular  disease.  This  information  refers  to  the  path-
way  made  by  KEGG  (Kyoto  Encyclopedia  of  Genes  and 
Genomes)  (Kanehisa  et al.,  2000).
    The  cerebrovascular  disease  etiology  map  page  refers 
to  the  risk  factors  that  are  associated  with  cere-
brovascular  disease  and  to  the  network  of  risk  factors 
(Fig.  1C).  If  one  of  the  risk  factors  is  clicked,  a  gene  list 
that  is  associated  with  the  risk  factor  will  be  displayed. 
Forty  genes  that  are  associated  with  cerebrovascular 
disease  were  selected  by  human  experts  who  utilized 
public  databases  (Fig.  1D). 
    250K  Affymetrix  SNP  chips  were  utilized  in  the  320 
control/disease  association  study  in  order  to  generate 
associated  markers  for  cerebrovascular  disease  in  a  ge-
nome-wide  search.  Some  of  the  candidate  genes  that 

Fig.  1.  Screenshots  for  Stroke-
Base  (http://sysbio.kribb.re.kr:8080/ 
stroke/).  (A)  The  system  structure 
for  data  manager,  result  viewer, 
and  network  analyzer. 
(B)  The 
physical  schema  of  the  database. 
(C)  Etiology  map  summarizing  cer-
ebrovascular  disease  risk  factors. 
(D)  Gene  list  associated  with  risk 
factors  of  cerebrovascular  disease. 
Kim  et al.

StrokeBase:  A  Database  of  Cerebrovascular  Genes    155

result 

(A)  Search 

Fig.  2.  Screenshots  for  the  candi-
date  genes  identified  in  Stroke-
Base. 
table 
showing  etiology  candidate  genes. 
(B)  SNP  chip  data  analysis  flow. 
(C)  Candidate  gene  network  with 
chromosome  mapping.  (D)  Search 
table  showing  associated  SNPs  by 
320  250K  Affymetrix  SNP  chips. 
Kim  et al.

were  identified  in  the  chip  analyses  are  shown  (Fig.  2A). 
The  SNP  chip  data  analysis  flow  is  shown  (Fig.  2B). 
SNP-markers  that  were  selected  by  the  experiments 
were  annotated  and  chromosomally  mapped  to  reveal  a 
comprehensive,  networked  gene  map  (Fig.  2C).  We 
found  overlaps  between  the  gene  markers  that  were  an-
notated  by  experts  and  by  the  SNP  experiment.  Each 
SNP  ID  is  linked  to  more  detailed  information.  Selected 
SNPs  with  a  given  p-value  are  available  in  StrokeBase 
(Fig.  2D).

Conclusion

StrokeBase  is  an  online  database  for  cerebrovascular 
disease  researchers.  StrokeBase  makes  it  possible  for 
scientists  to  provide  cerebrovascular  disease  association 
markers  by  in  silico  and  whole-genome  SNP  arrays. 
Using  data  and  tools  that  currently  are  available  in 
StrokeBase,  a  scientist  is  able  to  analyze  the  complex 
effect  of  genes  and  to  represent  the  frame  of  their  rela-
tionships  associated  with  cerebrovascular  disease.  The 
etiology  of  cerebrovascular  disease  was  constructed, 
and  40  genes  directly  related  to  cerebrovascular  disease 
were  identified.  Also,  1127  genes  that  were  indirectly  re-
lated  to  cerebrovascular  disease  but  directly  related  to 
the  etiology  of  cerebrovascular  disease  were  identified. 

The  SNP  chip-associated  genes  and  those  genes  that 
were  retrieved  from  in  silico  and  data  mining  systems 
were  compared.  We  developed  a  well-curated  cere-
brovascular  disease-associated  gene  network  and  pro-
vided  bioinformatic  resources  to  cerebrovascular  disease 
researchers.  StrokeBase  will  thus  serve  as  a  novel  and 
powerful  resource  for  reviewing  and  interpreting  cere-
brovascular  disease  association  data.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  supported  by  the  Cerebrovascular 
Disease  Project  of  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science 
and  Technology  (MEST)  and  in  part  by  the  KRIBB 
Intramural  Research  Program. 

References

Braunwald,  E.,  Fauci,  A.S.,  Kasper,  D.L.,  Hauser,  S.L., 
Longo,  D.L.,  and  Jameson,  J.L.  (2001). Harrison’s princi-
ples of internal medicine  (15th  int.  ed),  McGraw-Hill.

Hamosh,  A.,  Scott,  A.F.,  Amberger,  J.,  Bocchini,  C.,  Valle, 
D.,  and  McKusick,  V.A. 
(2002).  Online  Mendelian 
Inheritance  in  Man  (OMIM),  a  knowledgebase  of  human 
genes  and  genetic  disorders.  Nucleic Acids Res.  30, 
52-55.

Jin,  H.,  Kim,  S.H.,  Kim,  Y.U.,  Park,  Y.K.,  Ji,  M.,  and  Kim, 

156    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  153-156,  September  2008

Y.J.  (2008).  Development  of  KHapmap  Browser  using 
DAS  for  Korean  HapMap  Research.  Genomics & Infor-
matics  6,  57-63.

Kanehisa,  M.,  and  Goto,  S. 

(2000).  KEGG:  Kyoto 
Encyclopedia  of  Genes  and  Genomes.  Nucleic  Acids 
Res.  28,  27-30.

Peri,  S.  et al.  (2003).  Development  of  human  protein  refer-
ence  database  as  an  initial  platform  for  approaching  sys-
tems  biology  in  humans.  Genome Research  13,  2363- 
2371.

Toole,  J.F.  (1999).  Chapter  13:  Strokes  in  the  young. 
Cerebrovascular disorders.  Edition  5,  Lippincott  Williams 
&  Wilkins,  Philadelphia,  pp.283-316. 

Websites

Becker,  K.G.,  Barnes,  K.C.,  Bright,  T.J.,  and  Wang,  S.A. 
(2004).  The  Genetic  Association  Database.  http:// 

geneticassociationdb.nih.gov/.

Kent,  W.J.,  Sugnet,  C.W.,  Furey,  T.S.,  Roskin,  K.M.,  Pringle, 
T.H.,  Zahler,  A.M.,  and  Haussler,  D.  (2002).  The  human 
genome  browser  at  UCSC.  http://genome.ucsc.edu/.

McKusick-Nathans  Institute  for  Genetic  Medicine,  Johns 
Hopkins  University  (Baltimore,  MD)  and  National  Center 
for  Biotechnology  Information,  National  Library  of  Medi-
cine  (Bethesda,  MD).  (2000).  Online  Mendelian  Inheritance 
in  Man,  OMIM  (TM).  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.

Nucleus  Medical  Art:  3D  Medical  Animations. 

(2008). 

http://www.nucleusinc.com.

Sherry,  S.T.,  Ward,  M.H.,  Kholodov,  M.,  Baker,  J.,  Phan,  L., 
Smigielski,  E.M.,  and  Sirotkin,  K.  (2001).  dbSNP:  the  NCBI 
database  of  genetic  variation.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/SNP/.

xPharm:  The  Comprehensive  Pharmacology  Reference.  (2008). 

http://www.xpharm.com/citation?Article_ID=1050.

