APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  91-94,  June  2008

The  Korean  HapMap  Project  Website

Young  Uk  Kim1,  Seung-Ho  Kim2,  Hoon  Jin1, 
Young-Kyu  Park1,  Mihyun  Ji1  and  Young  Joo 
Kim1*

Availability:  The  Korean  HapMap  Database  is  freely 
available  at  http://www.khapmap.org  or  http://sysbio. 
kribb.re.kr:8080/khapmap/

1Medical  Genomics  Research  Center,  2Instrumental  Ana-
lysis  Laboratory,  KRIBB,  Daejeon  305-806,  Korea

Keywords: HapMap,  SNP,  Korean,  haplotype,  associa-
tion  study

Abstract

Summary

Single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  are  the  most 
abundant  form  of  human  genetic  variation  and  are  a  re-
source  for  mapping  complex  genetic  traits.  A  genome  is 
covered  by  millions  of  these  markers,  and  researchers 
are  able  to  compare  which  SNPs  predominate  in  people 
who  have  a  certain  disease.  The  International  HapMap 
Project,  launched  in  October,  2002,  motivated  us  to 
start  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  in  order  to  support 
Korean  HapMap  infrastructure  development  and  to  ac-
celerate  the  finding  of  genes  that  affect  health,  disease, 
and  individual  responses  to  medications  and  environ-
mental  factors.  A  Korean  SNP  and  haplotype  database 
system  was  developed  through  the  Korean  HapMap 
Project  to  provide  Korean  researchers  with  useful  da-
ta-mining 
information  about  disease-associated  bio-
markers  for  studies  on  complex  diseases,  such  as  dia-
betes,  cancer,  and  stroke.  Also,  we  have  developed  a 
series  of  software  programs  for  association  studies  as 
well  as  the  comparison  and  analysis  of  Korean  HapMap 
data  with  other  populations,  such  as  European,  Chinese, 
Japanese,  and  African  populations.  The  developed  soft-
ware  includes  HapMapSNPAnalyzer,  SNPflank,  HWE 
Test,  FESD,  D2GSNP,  SNP@Domain,  KMSD,  KFOD, 
KFRG,  and  SNP@WEB.  We  developed  a  disease-related 
SNP  retrieval  system,  in  which  OMIM,  GeneCards,  and 
MeSH  information  were  integrated  and  analyzed  for 
medical  research  scientists.  The  kHapMap  Browser  sys-
tem  that  we  developed  and  integrated  provides  hap-
lotype  retrieval  and  comparative  study  tools  of  human 
ethnicities  for  comprehensive  disease  association  stud-
ies  (http://www.khapmap.org).  It  is  expected  that  re-
searchers  may  be  able  to  retrieve  useful  information 
from  the  kHapMap  Browser  to  find  useful  biomarkers 
and  genes  in  complex  disease  association  studies  and 
use  these  biomarkers  and  genes  to  study  and  develop 
new  drugs  for  personalized  medicine.

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yjkim8@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8127,  Fax  +82-42-879-8119
Accepted  10  June  2008

The  International  HapMap  Project  started  in  October, 
2002  to  develop  a  haplotype  map  of  the  human  ge-
nome,  the  HapMap,  which  describes  common  patterns 
of  human  DNA  sequence  variation  (The International 
HapMap Consortium. 2007).  HapMap  is  expected  to  be 
a  key  resource  for  researchers  to  find  genes  that  affect 
health,  disease,  and  responses  to  drugs  and  environ-
mental  factors.  The  project  was  a  collaborative  effort 
between  scientists  in  Japan,  the  U.K.,  Canada,  China, 
Nigeria,  and  the  U.S.  This  motivated  us  to  start  the 
Korean  HapMap  Project  in  June,  2003  in  order  to  sup-
port  Korean  HapMap  infrastructure  development  as  well 
as  to  accelerate  finding  genes  that  affect  health,  dis-
ease,  and  individual  responses  to  medications  and  envi-
ronmental  factors  (Thorisson  et al.,  2005).  The  project 
was  undertaken  as  a  collaboration  between  Korean 
funding  agencies  (Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and 
Technology  and  Korean  National  Institute  of  Health),  ex-
perimental  academia  (Ulsan  Medical  Institute,  Sung-
KyunKwan  Medical  Institute,  and  Korea  Advanced  Insti-
tute  of  Science  and  Technology),  and  corporations  (DNA 
Link,  SNP-Genetics,  and  Samsung  Advanced  Institute  of 
Technology)  (Yoo  et al.,  2006;  Lee  et al.,  2008). 
    Resulting  from  the  project,  a  Korean  SNP  and  hap-
lotype  database  system  was  developed  to  help  those 
researchers  who  study  high-frequency,  complex  Korean 
diseases  and  changes 
in  ethnic  global  migratory 
variants.  In  the  project,  we  tried  to  accomplish  a  num-
ber  of  goals.  First,  the  system  should  be  able  to  provide 
essential  information  that  is  needed  for  gene  discovery 
of  complex  Korean  diseases.  Second,  the  system 
should  contain  basic  and  advanced  tools  that  may  ap-
ply  to  applications  such  as  diagnostics,  treatment,  and 
prevention  of  diseases.  Third,  the  database  system 
should  provide  Korean-specific  SNPs  and  haplotype  in-
formation  that  are  common  in  the  Korean  population.
    We  have  developed  a  series  of  software  programs  for 
association  studies  as  well  as  for  the  comparison  and 
analysis  of  Korean  HapMap  data  with  four  other  pop-
ulations  (Yorubans  in  Ibadan,  Nigeria;  Centre  d'Etude  du 

92    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  91-94,  June  2008

Polymorphisme  Humain  reference  families;  Japanese  in 
Tokyo;  and  Han  Chinese  in  Beijing)  (The International 
HapMap  Consortium.  2005).  The  software 
includes 
HapMapSNPAnalyzer,  SNPflank,  HWE  Test,  FESD  (Kang 
and  Choi  et al.,  2005;  Kim  and  Kim  et al.,  2007), 
D2GSNP  (Kang  and  Hong  et al.,  2006),  SNP@Domain 
(Han  and  Kang  et al.,  2006),  KMSD,  KFOD,  KFRG, 
SNP@WEB,  and  KHapMap  Browser.  As  a  partial  result 

of  this  project,  we  registered  data  that  encompasses 
1,764,000  Korean  SNPs  to  the  dbSNP  of  NCBI  (The 
dbSNP Website. 2008).  The  KHapMap  Browser,  based 
on  the  generic  genome  browser,  provides  haplotype  re-
trieval  and  comparative  study  tools  of  human  ethnicities 
for  comprehensive  disease  association  studies  (Stein et 
al.,  2002).  This  study  provides  a  starting  point  for  re-
search  to  identify  genetic  variants  that  are  based  on  in-

Fig.  1.  The  Korea  HapMap  Website  (http://www.khapmap.org).  (A)  Links  to  the  major  menu  of  the  site  are  located  at  the  top
of  the  page  and  the  quick  navigation  panel  on  the  left  border.  (B)  Data  search  page  is  shown.  Users  can  input  rsID  or  chro-
mosomal  position  with  both  a  user-set  minor  allele  frequency  (MAF)  and  a  user-set  minimum  genotyped  sample  number  in
the  input  area.  (C)  Search  result  shows  rsID  links  to  the  dbSNP  database,  allele,  MAF,  and  genotype  count.  (D)  The 
KHapMap  Browser  provides  interactive  access  to  the  HapMap  database  via  a  graphical  genome  browser.  Users  can  compare
Korean  SNP  data  with  other  population  descriptors  (European  (CEU),  Chinese  (CHB),  Japanese  (JPT),  African  (YRI),  and 
Korean  (KOR)  populations).  (Kim  et al.)

The  Korean  HapMap  Project  Website    93

herent  Korean  characteristics  and  catalog  genetic  sim-
ilarities  and  differences  compared  with  various  ethnic 
samples  that  are  generated  by  cohort-based  studies. 
Also,  it  supports  additional  results  in  promoting  the 
completeness  of  the  International  HapMap  Project.
    This  paper  presents  a  guide  to  using  those  tools,  in-
cluding  the  following:  retrieving  genotype  and  frequency 
data,  picking  tag-SNPs  for  use  in  association  studies, 
viewing  haplotypes  graphically,  and  examining  mark-
er-to-marker  LD  patterns. 

National  Institute  of  Health  (KNIH).  The  KNIH  samples 
were  collected  as  part  of  an  epidemiological  project;  the 
samples  represent  urban  and  rural  regions  that  are 
south  of  Seoul,  Korea.  The  sex  ratio  was  0.5,  and  mean 
age  was  50  years.  Informed  consent  from  all  participat-
ing  subjects  was  obtained  through  KNIH,  and  research 
approval  came  from  the  relevant  ethics  committees. 
DNA  was  isolated  from  peripheral  blood  leukocytes  ac-
cording  to  standard  procedures  with  proteinase  K-RNase 
digestion,  followed  by  phenol-chloroform  extraction.

Introduction to the KHapMap Project Web-
site

Effective  tools  developed  for  data  analy-
sis

The  results  of  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  are  displayed 
at  http://www.khapmap.org,  named  the  KHapMap  Pro-
ject  Website.  The  website  is  composed  of  six  parts  on 
display  (Fig.  1A).  The  main  menus  are  located  in  the  up-
per  part.  "Home"  is  the  starting  page  of  the  website. 
"Introduction"  and  "Projects"  contain  short  descriptions 
and  tutorials  that  concern  the  HapMap  Project.  "Ser-
vices"  is  the  starting  point  to  the  software  that  was  de-
veloped  during  the  project.  "Data"  allows  access  to  the 
project's  raw  data  for  searching,  downloading,  and 
uploading.  Users  can  search  for  SNP  rsIDs  in  two  ways: 
(i)  rs  number,  and  (ii)  chromosome  number  and  position 
with  both  a  user-set  minor  allele  frequency  (MAF)  and  a 
user-set  minimum  number  of  genotyped  samples  (Fig. 
1B).  A  search  result  shows  rsID  links  to  the  dbSNP  da-
tabase,  allele,  MAF,  and  genotype  counts  (Fig.  1C). 
"Links"  connects  the  user  to  the  working  groups  of  the 
project  and  other  related  sites. 
    As  an  auxiliary  menu,  "Quick  Link"  is  located  on  the 
left  part  of  the  web  page.  "Quick  Link"  holds  shortcuts 
to  the  programs  that  users  may  use  more  often,  such 
as  KHapMap  Browser,  HapMapSnp  Analyzer,  SNPflank, 
D2GSNP,  FESD,  DOMAINSNP,  and  KMSD.  Most  tools 
in  Quick  Link  can  be  operated  in  the  same  window,  ex-
cept  for  FESD  and  KMSD,  which  are  too  large  to  oper-
ate  in  the  same  frame.  In  programming,  in  addition  to 
Java/JSP,  JSF  (Java  Server  Faces)  was  adapted  to  the 
KHapMap  Website  in  order  to  simplify  building  user  in-
terfaces  for  JavaServer  applications.  As  a  result,  the 
website  can  be  quickly  and  flexibly  built  by  assembling 
reusable  UI  components  in  a  page  and  connecting 
these  components  to  application  data  sources  (The Sun 
Microsoft website,  2008).

Sources  for  Korean  HapMap

Genomic  DNA  from  90  unrelated  Korean  individuals  for 
the  Korean  HapMap  Project  was  generously  provided 
from  the  Genomic  Research  Center  in  the  Korean 

HapMapSnp  Analyzer  allows  users  to  analyze  HapMap 
data  visually  and  extract  information  that  is  related  to 
the  HapMap  data  with  ease.  SNPflank  is  a  web-based 
tool  that  provides  flanking  sequences  of  given  SNPs  to 
help  PCR  primer  design.  D2GSNP  is  a  web-based  serv-
er  system  that  is  designed  to  find  SNPs  within  those 
genes  that  are  known  to  be  related  to  human  diseases. 
With  the  web  interface  of  D2GSNP,  users  can  find  SNPs 
within  genes  that  are  responsible  for  certain  diseases 
and  obtain  their  flanking  sequences  for  further  genotyp-
ing  experiments  (Kang  and  Hong  et  al.  2006).  In 
D2GSNP,  OMIM,  GeneCards,  and  MeSH  information 
were  integrated  and  analyzed  for  medical  research 
scientists. 
    FESD  is  a  web-based  integrated  database  for  select-
ing  sets  of  SNPs  in  putative  functional  elements  in  hu-
man  genes  (Kang  and  Choi et al.  2005;  Kim  and  Kim et 
al.  2007).  It  provides  a  set  of  SNPs  that  are  located  in 
10  different  functional  elements.  SNP@Domain  is  a  web 
resource  of  SNPs  within  protein  domain  structures  and 
sequences  (Han  and  Kang et al.  2006).  Users  can  inves-
tigate  SNPs  within  protein  domains  with  2D  and  3D 
maps,  if  available.  KMSD  is  a  database  that  provides  in-
formation  on  monomorphic  SNPs  that  are  found  solely 
in  the  Korean  population.  It  is  composed  of  a  SNP- 
searching  tool  for  monomorphic  SNP  information  by  rsID 
and  a  drawing  tool  for  viewing  allele  frequency  pie 
graphs  that  compare  Korean,  Japanese,  Chinese,  Euro-
pean,  and  African  populations. 
    The  KHapMap  Browser  provides  interactive  access  to 
the  HapMap  database  through  a  graphical  genome 
browser  (Fig.  1D).  The  browser  allows  users  to  search 
the  genome  for  a  gene  or  a  region  of  interest  and  then 
visualize  the  corresponding  distribution  of  SNPs  and 
patterns  of  common  variation  in  the  region.  It  also  pro-
vides  facilities  for  downloading  SNP  assay  information, 
genotypes,  and  allele  frequency  information  and  for  gen-
erating  customized  sets  of  tag-SNPs  for  association 
studies.  Users  can  compare  Korean  SNP  data  with  oth-

94    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  91-94,  June  2008

er  population  descriptors  (European  (CEU),  Chinese 
(CHB),  Japanese  (JPT),  African  (YRI),  and  Korean  (KOR) 
populations).  The  browser  allows  users  to  download 
genotyping  data  across  a  region  in  a  format  that  is  suit-
able  for  Haploview  analysis  (Barrett et al.  2005).  It  is  ex-
pected  that  researchers  will  be  able  to  use  the  browser 
to  retrieve  useful  information  and  to  find  valuable  bio-
markers  and  genes  in  complex  disease  association 
studies.  They  may  use  the  information  to  study  and  de-
velop  new  drugs  in  the  era  of  personalized  medicine.

Acknowledgements

We  thank  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  Leaders,  Dr. 
Jong-Eun  Lee  at  DNA  Link,  Inc.,  Dr.  Jung-Joo  Hwang  at 
Samsung  Advanced 
Institute  of  Technology,  Profs. 
Jun-Mo  Yang  and  Jong-Won  Kim,  at  Sungkyunkwan 
University  School  of  Medicine,  Kyuyoung  Song  at 
University  of  Ulsan  College  of  Medicine,  Dr.  Hyongdoo 
Shin  at  SNP  Genetics,  Inc,  and  Prof.  Chang-Won  Kang 
at  KAIST  and  the  sample  collection  group,  Drs.  Kuchan 
Kimm5,  Bok-Ghee  Han5,  Bermseok  Oh  at  the  Genomic 
Research  Center,  Korean  National  Institute  of  Health. 
This  research  was  partially  supported  by  the  Korean 
HapMap  Project  and 
the  Cerebrovascular  Disease 
Project  of  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and 
Technology  (MEST).

References

Barrett,  J.C.,  Fry,  B.,  Maller,  J.,  and  Daly,  M.J.  (2005). 
Haploview:  analysis  and  visualization  of  LD  and  hap-
lotype  maps.  Bioinformatics 21,  263-265.

Hamosh,  A.,  Scott,  A.F.,  Amberger,  J.,  Bocchini,  C.,  Valle, 
D.,  and  McKusick,  V.A.  (2002).  Online  mendelian  in-
heritance  in  man  (OMIM),  a  knowledgebase  of  human 
genes  and  genetic  disorders.  Nucleic Acids Res.  30, 
52-55.

Han,  A.,  Kang,  H.J.,  Cho,  Y.,  Lee,  S.,  Kim,  Y.J.,  and  Gong, 
S.  (2006).  SNP@Domain:  a  web  resource  of  single  nu-
cleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  within  protein  domain 
structures  and  sequences.  Nucleic Acids Res. 34,  W642- 
W644.

Kang,  H.,  Choi,  K.O.,  Kim,  B.D.,  Kim,  S.,  and  Kim,  Y.J. 
(2005).  FESD:  a  functional  element  SNPs  database  in 
human.  Nucleic Acids Res. 33,  D518-D522.

Kang,  H.,  Hong,  T.H.,  Chung,  W.H.,  Kim,  Y.U.,  Jung,  J.H., 
Hwang,  S.H.,  Han,  A.R.,  and  Kim,  Y.J.  (2006).  D2GSNP: 
a  web  server  for  the  selection  of  Single  Nucleotide  Poly-

morphisms  within  human  disease  genes.  Genomics & 
Informatics 4,  45-47.

Kim,  H.J.,  Kim,  I.H.,  Shin,  K.H.,  Park,  Y.K.,  Kang,  H.,  and 
Kim,  Y.J.  (2007).  FESD  II:  a  revised  functional  element 
SNP  database  of  human  ethnicities.  Genomics & Infor-
matics 5,  188-193.

Lee,  J.E.,  Jang,  H.Y.,  Kim,  S.,  Yoo,  Y.K.,  Hwang,  J.J.,  Jun, 
H.J.,  Lee,  K.,  Son,  O.,  Yang,  J.M.,  Ahn,  K.S.,  Kim,  E., 
Lee,  H.W.,  Song,  K.,  Kim,  H.L.,  Lee,  S.G.,  Yoon,  Y., 
Kimm,  K.,  Han,  B.G.,  Oh,  B.,  Kim,  C.B.,  Jin,  H.,  Choi, 
K.O.,  Kang,  H.,  and  Kim,  Y.J.  (2008).  Chromosome  22 
LD  map  comparison  between  Korean  and  other  popu-
lations.  Genomics & Informatics 6,  18-28.

Stein,  L.D.,  Mungall,  C.,  Shu,  S.,  Caudy,  M.,  Mangone,  M., 
Day,  A.,  Nickerson,  E.,  Stajich,  J.E.,  Harris,  T.W.,  Arva, 
A., et al.  (2002).  The  generic  genome  browser:  A  building 
block  for  a  model  organism  system  database.  Genome 
Res. 12,  1599-1610.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2005).  A  haplotype 

map  of  the  human  genome.  Nature 437,  1299-1320.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2007).  A  second 
generation  human  haplotype  map  of  over  3.1  million 
SNPs.  Nature 449,  851-861.

Thorisson,  G.A.,  Smith,  A.V.,  Krishnan,  L.,  and  Stein,  L.D. 
International  HapMap  Project  Web  site. 

(2005).  The 
Genome Research 15,  1592-1593.

Yoo,  Y.K.,  Ke,  X.,  Hong,  S.,  Jang,  H.Y.,  Park,  K.,  Kim,  S., 
Ahn,  T.,  Lee,  Y.D.,  Song,  O.,  Rho,  N.Y.,  Lee,  M.S.,  Lee, 
Y.S.,  Kim,  J.,  Kim,  Y.J.,  Yang,  J.M.,  Song,  K.,  Kimm,  K., 
Weir,  B.,  Cardon,  L.R.,  Lee,  J.E.,  and  Hwang,  J.J.  (2006). 
Fine-scale  map  of  encyclopedia  of  DNA  elements  regions 
in  the  Korean  population.  Genetics 174,  491-497.

Websites

McKusick-Nathans  Institute  for  Genetic  Medicine,  Johns 
Hopkins  University  (Baltimore,  MD)  and  National  Center 
for  Biotechnology 
Information,  National  Library  of 
Medicine  (Bethesda,  MD).  (2000).  Online  mendelian  inher-
itance  in  man,  OMIM  (TM).  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
omim/.

Sherry,  S.T.,  Ward,  M.H.,  Kholodov,  M.,  Baker,  J.,  Phan,  L., 
Smigielski,  E.M.,  and  Sirotkin,  K.  (2001).  dbSNP:  the 
NCBI  database  of  genetic  variation.  http://www.ncbi.nlm. 
nih.gov/SNP/.

The  dbSNP  website.  (2008).  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

projects/SNP.

The 

International  HapMap  website. 

(2008).  http://www. 

hapmap.org.

The  Sun  Microsoft  website.  (2008).  http://java.sun.com/jav-

aee/javaserverfaces.

