APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(2)  94-96,  June  2010

Java  DOM  Parsers  to  Convert  KGML  into  SBML  and  BioPAX 
Common  Exchange  Formats

Kyung-Eun  Lee,  Myung-Ha  Jang,  Arang  Rhie, 
Chin  Ting  Thong,  Sanduk  Yang  and  Hyun- 
Seok  Park*

Department  of  Computer  Science,  Ewha  Womans  Uni-
versity,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea

Abstract

Integrating  various  pathway  data  collections  to  create 
new  biological  knowledge  is  a  challenge,  for  which  nov-
el  computational  tools  play  a  key  role.  For  this  purpose, 
we  developed 
the  Java-based  conversion  modules 
KGML2SBML  and  KGML2BioPAX  to  translate  KGML 
(KEGG  Markup  Language)  into  a  couple  of  common  da-
ta  exchange  formats:  SBML  (Systems  Biology  Markup 
Language)  and  BioPAX  (Biological  Pathway  Exchange). 
We  hope  that  our  work  will  be  beneficial  for  other  Java 
developers  when  they  extend  their  bioinformatics  sys-
tem  into  SBML-  or  BioPAX-aware  analysis  tools.  This  is 
part  of  our  ongoing  effort  to  develop  an  ultimate 
KEGG-based  pathway  enrichment  analysis  system.

Availability:  You  may  download  the  conversion  module 
from  Sourceforge.net 
(https://sourceforge.net/projects/ 
ngssequencealig/).  The  feedback  from  developing  the 
conversion  tools  will  provide  valuable  feedback  for  the 
continued  evolution  of  a  universal  exchange  format.

Keywords:  systems  biology,  visualization,  common  ex-
change  format

Introduction

Recently,  various  frameworks  for  the  XML  formats  of  bi-
ological  network  information  were  proposed  (Achard  et 
al.,  2001;  Finney  et al.,  2006).  Among  them,  two  ap-
proaches  have  gained  popularity  as  promising  candi-
dates  to  be  adopted  as  future  standards  in  the  field: 

SBML  and  BioPAX  (Hucka  et al.,  2003;  Strömbäck  et 

al.,  2005).  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  been  working  on 
a  KEGG-based  pathway  analysis  system  in  past  years 
(Jang,  2010;  Ham,  2007).  Unfortunately,  KGML  (Kanehi-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  2  June  2010

sa  and  Goto,  2000)  is  not  a  representative  common 
pathway  exchange  format.  The  KEGG  site  (http://www. 
kegg.org/)  provides  metabolic  pathway  data,  not  only  in 
KGML  format  but  also  in  BioPAX  (http://www.biopax. 
org/)  Level  1  and  SBML  (http://www.sbml.org/)  format. 
Still,  the  KEGG  site  itself  does  not  offer  conversion 
tools.  We  were  able  to  find  only  two  conversion  tools, 
called KEGG2SBML (http://sbml.org/Software/KEGG2SBML) 
and KEGGconverter (http://www.grissom.gr/Keggconverter). 
Both  KEGG2SBML  (Funahashi,  2004)  and  KEGGconverter 
(Moutselos  et al,  2009)  deal  only  with  SBML. 
    Thus, we decided to develop Java-based KGML2SBML 
and  KGML2BioPAX  parsers  with  a  graphical  user  inter-
face.  These  parsers  not  only  convert  KGML  into  SBML 
but  also  convert  KGML  into  BioPAX. 

Overview  of  the  BioPAX  and  SBML  stan-
dards

BioPAX  and  SBML  are  becoming  one  of  the  most  wide-
ly  used  common  data  exchange  formats  that  can  be 
widely  used  to  simulate  and  visualize  biological  net-

works  (Strömbäck  et al.,  2005).  Both  BioPAX  (Level  3) 

and  SBML  (Level  1)  can  encode  signaling  pathways, 
metabolic  pathways,  and  regulatory  pathways,  although 
SBML  can  represent  finer  details  (Fig.  1).  However,  they 

Fig.  1.  SBML  (Systems  Biology  Markup  Language)  for  sim-
ulation  model  exchange  formats,  and  BioPAX  (Biological 
Pathway  Exchange)  for  database  exchange  format.  Each 
SBML  Level  is  intended  to  describe  a  biochemical  network 
or  a  pathway.  BioPAX  is  defined  in  a  number  of  steps, 
called  levels.  Level  1  focuses  on  metabolic  networks,  and 
Level  2  adds  molecular  interaction  networks.

Java  DOM  Parsers  to  Convert  KGML    95

are  not  competing  standards.  Rather,  they  are  comple-
mentary  approaches  to  describe  related  phenomena. 
    SBML  is  targeted  at  modeling  systems  of  dynamic  bi-
ochemical  reaction  networks.  BioPAX  is  an  RDF  (Re-
source  Description  Framework)  and  OWL-based  stand-
ard  and  assumes  a  static  view  of  the  network  model. 
BioPAX  does  not  contain  mathematical  formulas  but 
provides  more  detailed  information  concerning  the  in-
dividual  molecules  and  interactions.  If  one’s  aim  is  sim-
ulation  and  computational  analysis,  then  SBML  has  bet-
ter  API  supports  than  BioPAX.  However,  BioPAX  is  a 
rich  standard  when  it  comes  to  encoding  the  inter-
actions,  such  as  genetics.
    Unfortunately,  BioPAX  and  SBML,  the  two  most  wide-
spread  standards  for  storing  pathway  data,  are  semanti-

cally  different.  Conversion  modules  between  KGML  and 
these  two  formats  may  lead  to  loss  or  distortion  of  data. 
This  seriously  limits  the  automatic  integration  of  models. 
To  obtain  sufficient  generality  in  the  model,  many  details 
have  to  be  omitted  in  the  model  hierarchy. 

Implementation

We  implemented  the  KGML2SBML  and  KGML2BioPAX 
parsers,  which  convert  KGML  into  SBML  Level  2,  ver-
sion  4  documents,  and  BioPAX.  These  two  parsers  are 
implemented  with  the  Java  DOM  (Document  Object 
Model)  parser  and  require  Java  APIs  for  XML  Process-
ing  (http://java.sun.com/xml/jaxp/index.html).  The  map-
pings  between  KGML  and  these  two  formats  are  sum-

(a)  Mappings  between  KGML  and  SBML

(b)  Mappings  between  KGML  and  BioPAX

Fig. 2.  The  KEGG  Pathway  element  is  a  root  element,  and  one  pathway  element  is  specified  for  one  pathway  map  in  KGML.
The  entry,  Relation,  and  Reaction  elements  specify  the  graph  information.  SBML  is  defined  in  terms  of  the  participating 
Reactants  and  Products,  along  with  optional  modifier  Species,  an  optional  Kinetic  Law.  The  basic  building  blocks  of  a 
BioPAX  model  are  the  Physical  Entity,  Interaction,  and  Pathway  classes.  Each  Interaction  describes  relationships  between 
Physical  Entities.

(a)  The  KEGG  Markup  Language  (KGML)  is  an  exchange  for-
mat  of  the  KEGG  graph  objects,  especially  the  KEGG 
pathway  maps.  The  detailed 
in 
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/xml/. 

is  described 

format 

(b)  A  definition  of  a  model  in  SBML  consists  of  lists  of  one  or 
more  of  these  various  components:  Compartment, Species, 
Reaction, Parameter, Unit definition,  and Rule.  The  detailed  for-
mat  is  described  in  http://sbml.org/Documents/Specifications.

Fig.  3.  An  exemplary  conversion  of  KGML  into  SBML.

96    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(2)  94-96,  June  2010

marized  in  Fig.  2.  KGML2SBML  uses  the  LIGAND  data-
base  of  KEGG  as  input  to  generate  SBML  documents. 
For  example, KineticLaw  in  reaction  and  specific  names 
of  compounds  can  be  added  in  a  converted  SBML  file 
with  the  use  of  KEGG  Ligand  information.
    An  exemplary  conversion  between  KGML  and  SBML 
is  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Conversion  between  KGML  and 
BioPAX  has  been  done  in  a  similar  fashion.  The  online 
SBML  Validator  (http://sbml.org/Facilities/Validator)  has 
been  used  to  check  the  syntax  and  internal  consistency 
for  converted  SBML  documents.  Also,  BioPAX  Validator 
(http://www.biopax.org/biopax-validator/index.html)  has 
been  used  to  check  converted  BioPAX  documents  and 
fix  syntatic  and  semantic  errors.  All  converted  SBML 
and  BioPAX  documents  are  available  (https://sourceforge. 
net/projects/ngssequencealig/).

Conclusion 

Most  current  simulation  and  analysis  packages  already 
support  SBML  and  BioPAX,  and  more  are  in  the  proc-
ess  of  being  extended  to  support  them.  Also,  most  of 
the  top  journals  in  the  bioinformatics  field  encourage  au-
thors  to  prepare  models  of  biochemical  reaction  net-
works  using  common  exchange  formats  and  to  deposit 
the  model  into  the  BioModels  database.  For  this  reason, 
we  developed  simple  Java  utility  tools  for  converting 
KGML  to  SBML  and  BioPAX.  Making  the  databases 
available  in  common  pathway  exchange  formats  would 
be  a  first  step  toward  building  an  open  source  pathway 
analysis  resource.

Acknowledgments

This  software  was  developed  thanks  to  generous  fund-
ing  from  the  SMBA  Industrial-Educational  Cooperation 
Project  (000358780109)  of  the  Korean  government.

References

Achard,  F.,  Vaysseix,  G.,  and  Barillot,  E.  (2001).  XML,  bio-
integration.  Bioinformatics  17, 

informatics  and  data 
115-125.

Finney,  A.,  Hucka,  M.,  Bornstein,  B.J.,  Keating,  S.M., 
Shapiro,  B.E.,  Matthews,  J.,  Kovitz,  B.L.,  Schilstra,  M.J., 
Funahashi,  A.,  Doyle,  J.C.,  and  Kitano,  H. 
(2006). 
Software  infrastructure  for  effective  communication  and 
reuse  of  computational  models.  Systems  modeling  in  cell 
biology:  from  concepts  to  nuts  and  bolts. MIT Press.  pp. 
369-378.

Funahashi,  A.,  Jyoraku,  A.,  and  Kitano,  H.  (2004).  Conver-

ting  the  KEGG  Pathway  Database  to  SBML.  5th Int. 
Conf. Syst. Biol. (ICSB2004). 

Ham,  S.I.,  Song,  E.H.,  Yang,  S.D.,  Thong,  C.T.,  Rhie,  A., 
Galbadrakh,  B.,  Lee,  K.E.,  Park,  H.S.,  and  Lee,  S.H. 
(2007).  J2.5dPathway:  a  2.5D  visualization  tool  to  dis-
play  selected  nodes  in  biological  pathways,  in  paral-
lel  planes.  Genomics Inform.  7,  171-174.

Hucka,  M.,  Finney,  A.,  Sauro,  H.M.,  Bolouri,  H.,  Doyle,  J.C., 
and  Kitano,  H.  (2003).  The  systems  biology  markup 
language  (SBML):  a  medium  for  representation  and 
exchange 
network  models. 
Bioinformatics  19,  524-531. 

biochemical 

of 

Jang,  M.,  Whang,  J.W.,  Lewis,  E.,  and  Park,  H.S.  (2010). 
An  interpretation  of  biological  metabolites  and  their 
reactions  based  on  relation  degree  of  compound 
pairs  in  KEGG  XML  Files.  JSW.  5,  187-194.

Kanehisa,  M.,  and  Goto,  S.  (2000).  KEGG:  kyoto  encyclope-
dia  of  genes  and  genomes.  Nucl. Acids Res.  28,  27-30.
Moutselos,  K.,  Kanaris,  I.,  Chatziioannou,  A.,  Maglogiannis, 
I.,  and  Kolisis,  F.  (2009).  KEGG  converter:  a  tool  for 
the  in-silico  modelling  of  metabolic  networks  of  the 
KEGG  Pathways  database.  BMC Bioinformatics  10, 
324.

Strömbäck,  L.,  and  Lambrix,  P.  (2005).  Representations  of 

molecular  pathways:  an  evaluation  of  SBML,  PSI  MI  and 
BioPAX.  Bioinformatics  21,  4401-4407.

