Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  37-38,  March  2011

ManBIF:  a  Program  for  Mining  and  Managing  Biobank  Impact 
Factor  Data

program  is  required  to  search  for  multiple  biobanks 
against  multiple  literature  files.
    We  have  developed  ManBIF,  a  program,  to  search  for 
Biobank  citation  information  from  PDF  files  in  the  liter-
ature  to  produce  a  summary  report.

Methods 

System  Structure

ManBIF  is  composed  of  three  modules  for  text  ex-
traction,  indexing,  and  searching  (Fig.  1).
    The  first  module  converts  PDF  files  to  text  files  and 
extracts  the  full  text  for  searching.  The  converted  files 

Fig.  1.  The  system  structure  of  ManBIF.

Ki  Jin  Yu1,  Jungmin  Nam2,  Yun  Her2,  Minseock 
Chu2,  Hyungseok  Seo2,  Junwoo  Kim2,  Jaepil 
Jeon2,  Hyekyung  Park2  and  Kiejung  Park1*

1Division  of  Bio-Medical  Informatics,  Center  for  Genome 
Science,  National  Institute  of  Health,  Cheongwon-gun 
363-951,  Korea,  and  2Division  of  Korea  BioBank, 
Center 
Institute  of 
Health,  Cheongwon-gun  363-951,  Korea

for  Genome  Science,  National 

Abstract

Biobank  Impact  Factor  (BIF),  which  is  a  very  effective 
criterion  to  evaluate  the  activity  of  biobanks,  can  be  es-
timated  by  the  citation  information  of  biobanks  from  sci-
entific  papers.  We  have  developed  a  program,  ManBIF, 
to  investigate  the  citation  information  from  PDF  files  in 
the  literature.  The  program  manages  a  dictionary  for  ex-
pressions  to  represent  biobanks  and  their  resources, 
mines  the  citation  information  by  converting  PDF  files  to 
text  files  and  searching  with  a  dictionary,  and  produces 
a  statistical  report  file.  It  can  be  used  as  an  important 
tool  by  biobanks. 

Availability:  ManBIF  and  its  manual  are  available  at 
http://cgs.cdc.go.kr/manbif

Keywords:  biobank,  Biobank  Impact  Factor  Data

Introduction

Biobanks,  as  repository  organizations,  are  getting  more 
and  more  important,  not  only  nationwide  but  also 
worldwide.  As  their  roles  and  functions  are  being  ex-
panded  to  effectively  maintain  and  distribute  biological 
resources,  international  cooperation  and  competition  is 
getting  very  active.
    BIF  (Biobank  Impact  Factor),  a  comparative  index  of 
citation  information  of  biobanks  in  scientific  papers,  is 
used  as  a  major  criterion  of  biobank  activity  (Zika, 
2010).
    As  a  biobank  can  be  represented  with  several  names, 
including  abbreviations  and  a  full  name,  a  dedicated 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  kjpark63@gmail.com
Tel  +82-43-719-8850,  Fax  +82-43-719-8869
Accepted  7  March  2011

Fig.  2.  Editing  the  ManBIF  biobank  dictionary.

38    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  37-38,  March  2011

Fig.  3.  Screenshots  of  ManBIF  search  results  that  show  a  list  of  biobanks  and  their  paper  hits  (a),  a  list  of  all  hit  papers
stored  in  the  database  (b),  and  a  list  of  hit  papers  for  a  biobank  (c).

are  stored  in  the  ManBIF  database.  The  second  module 
analyzes  each  full  text  into  tokens  after  removing  un-
necessary  words,  and  the  tokens  are  indexed  and  stor-
ed  in  the  database.  The  last  module  searches  the  in-
dexed  tokens  for  biobank  expressions  in  the  ManBIF  bi-
obank  dictionary  (Fig.  2),  which  can  be  edited  for  man-
aging  biobank  name  databases.  The  search  results  of  all 
hits  against  all  biobanks  are  summarized  into  a  report.

Implementation

library 

functions. 

converted  with 

ManBIF  was  implemented  with  Java,  and  many  libraries 
and  tools  were  used.  iText  (Lowagie  and  Soares,  2010) 
was  used  to  treat  and  convert  PDF  files.  The  PDF  files 
are 
Lucene 
(Gospodnetic,  2010)  was  used  as  a  text  search  engine 
to  support  high-performance  indexing  and  searching.  jxl 
(GPL,  2009)  was  used  for  generating  Excel  files.  ManBIF 
can  read  Excel  files  and  produce  search  result  files  in 
Excel  format.
    The  search  results  are  summarized  as  a  ‘biobanks  vs 
paper  hits’  table,  and  more  detailed  results  are  also 
shown,  including  the  detailed  hit  information  for  each  bi-
obank  (Fig.  3).

Result  and  Discussion

ManBIF  analyzes  PDF  files  to  search  for  diverse  ex-
pressions  of  all  biobanks  with  high-performance  index-
ing  and  a  user-friendly  interface.  The  program  can  be 
used  practically  for  evaluating  the  activity  of  biobanks  in 

is, 

‘Abstract,’ 

‘Introduction,’ 

a  given  interval.
    The  program  can  be  improved  for  more  precise  and 
categorical  searches.  Searching  by  sections  of  papers, 
‘Methods,’  and 
that 
‘Results,’  can  be  more  helpful  to  analyze  precisely. 
Showing  marked  hit  regions  directly  on  PDF  files  can  be 
more  powerful  in  confirming  and  analyzing  hit  infor-
mation.  The  search  feature  for  resource  names  or  IDs 
related  to  biobanks  could  also  be  implemented  for 
improvement.  Such  an  evolution  could  make  the  pro-
gram  an  important  tool  for  biobanks.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Korea  Biobank  Project 
from 
for  Disease  Control  and 
Prevention.

the  Korea  Centers 

References

GNU  General  Public  License  (GPL)  (2009).  Java  Excel  API  - 
A  Java  API  to  read,  write  and  modify  Excel  spread-
sheets.  http://www.jexcelapi.org.

Gospodnetic,  O.  and  Hatcher,  E.  (2010).  Lucene  in  Action, 

Second  Edition  (Manning  Publications).

Lowagie,  B.  and  Soares,  P.  (2010).  iText  in  Action,  Second 

Edition  (Manning  Publications).

Zika,  E.,  Paci,  Daniele.,  Schulte  in  den  Bäumen,  T.,  Braun, 
A.,  RijKers-Defrasne,  S.,  Deschénes,  M.,  Fortier, 

I., 
Laage-Hellman,  J.,  Scerri,  C.  A.  and  Ibarreta,  D.  (2010) 
Biobanks  in  Europe:  Prospects  for  Harmonisation  and 
Networking,  JRC  scientific  and  Technical  Reports.

