Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  3(3) 68-73, September 2005 

Development of a Knowledge Base for Korean 
Pharmacogenomics Research Network 

Chan  Hee  Park,  Su  Yeon  Lee,  Yong  Jung,  Yu 
Rang Park, Hye Won Lee, and Ju Han Kim* 

Seoul  National  University  Biomedical  Informatics 
(SNUBI),  Seoul  National  University  College  of  Medicine, 
Seoul  110-799,  Korea 

for  KPRN 

Abstract 
Pharmacogenomics  research  requires  an  intelligent in(cid:173)
tegration  of  large-scale  genomic and  clinical  data with 
public and private knowledge resources. We developed 
a  web-based  knowledge  base 
(Korea 
Pharrnacogenomics  Research  Network,  http://kprn.snubi. 
orgl).  Four major types of information is integrated;  ge(cid:173)
netic  variation,  drug  information,  disease  information, 
and literature annotation. Eighteen Korean pharmacoge(cid:173)
nomics research groups in collaboration have submitted 
859  genotype  data sets  for  91  disease-related  genes. 
Integrative analysis and visualization of the large collec(cid:173)
tion  of  data  supported  by  integrated  biomedical  path(cid:173)
ways  and  ontology  resources  are  provided  with  a 
user-friendly interface and visualization engine empowered 
by Generic Genome Browser. 

Keywords:  Pharmacogenomics, Alleles, MeSH, PharmGKB, 
Goldenpath,  Genew,  Generic Genome Browser 

I ntrocluction 
Human Genome map is nearly completed. Pharmacoge(cid:173)
netics and  Pharmacogenomics which deal  with the ge(cid:173)
netic  or  genomic  basis  underlying  variable  drug  re(cid:173)
sponses in  individuals have become the center of inter(cid:173)
est all  over the  world.  In  this situation,  it  is  recognized 
that  pharmacogenomic  and  pharmacogenetic  studies 
form a field of study that can be applied in clinical medi(cid:173)
cine at the earliest time. And many biomedicalogists are 
interested in  this field  because they believe that it can 
make individualized therapy possible. 

It is expected that a technique of individual therapy in 
genetic  basis  will  be  put  to  practical  use  in  patient 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail juhan@snu.ac.kr, 
Tel +82-2-740-8320, Fax +82-2-747-4830 
Accepted 5 September 2005 

treatment within 10 years. Experts in this field have tried 
to apply the technique to a part of treatment with drugs 
although there still remains limitation. 

At  present,  there  is  a  centralized  database,  Pharm 
GKB(Kiein eta/., 2001) (Pharmacogenomics Knowledge 
Base), where researchers store the outcome of the phar(cid:173)
macogenomics  study world  wide.  PharmGKB provides 
the functions in which we can collect and search for the 
result  of study about what drug  response occurs  in  in(cid:173)
dividuals according to genetic variation. The standard of 
data model for pharmacogenomics data, however, is not 
present,  yet.  Moreover, it is hard to find a database ex(cid:173)
cept  PharmGKB  which  collects  pharmacogenomics 
data. As a group of large research collaboration,  KPRN 
felt the need of having its own repository system with in(cid:173)
tegrated biomedical resources. The present study intends 
to  deal  with  pharmacogenomics  data  repository  system 
being  developed  in  KPRN.  Its  goals  include  central(cid:173)
ization  of  the  domestic  pharmacogenomics  data,  pre(cid:173)
venting duplication of similiar research, and information(cid:173)
sharing  among the joint research  team  as well  as with 
the general research community. It intends to provide ge(cid:173)
nomic function  information about sequence variance as 
well as expression, extending it to be knowledge-based. 

Method 
Referenced data schema, database, and tool 
1. PhannGKB XML schema 
PharmGKB  is  a  Knowledge-base  developed  at  the 
Stanford  University  for  the  function  of  searching  and 
retrieving  the  result  of  research  in  pharmacogenomics 
(http://www.pharmgkb.org/).  Its  XML  schema  explains 
information  about  sequence  variation,  drug  data,  and 
phenotype  data.  It  describes  the  information  of  side 
effects  from  a  drug  treatment  that  are  caused  by 
sequence  variation.  One  can  find  the  details  of  the 
schema at http://www.pharmgkb.org/schema/index.html/. 

2. Aperon drug database 
We  use  the  drug  database  made  in  Aperon(Kaiser, 
2005) to capture the name of drug. Presently, Aperon is 
also used by PharmGKB. It catalogs 3,885 drug names, 
9,176 generic names, and 9,177 trade name. 

Development of a Knowledge Base for Korean Pharmacogenomics Research Network  69 

3. Medical Subjects Heading (MeSH) 
MeSHMeSH(Schulman  et at.,  2000),  a thesaurus made 
by  NLM  (National  Library  of  Medicine),  is  used  for 
indexing an article in MEDLINE.  It provides a consistent 
way for searching the information that includes different 
terms for the same concepts.  For instance, a malignant 
tumor can be ordinarily named either 'neoplasm' or 'cancer'. 
In  MeSH,  however,  neoplasm  is  adopted.  Also,  MeSH 
terms old people 'aged'. 

4. uses GolctenPat 
Our  knowledge  base  uses  the  GoldenPath(Kent  eta/., 
2005; Karolchik et at., 2003) developed at the University of 
California to capture the position where a sequence variation 
occurred. GoldenPath enables the use of absolute coordinate 
system for a position of variation on Human Chromosome 
Map,  allovving  a  consistent  positioning  of  variations  and 
annotation on the basis of the position of variation. 

ChranosaneNuniler : BasePosition 
For example, 'chr2:23451703' indicates the 23451703'd 
position on the 2nd chromosome. 

5. Genew (Human Gene Nomenclature Database) 
We  use the gene  name  provided  by Genew(Wain  et at., 

2002)  to  associate  it  with  the  information  of  a sequence 
variation.  Genew  is  the  precisely  verified  database  by 
editors in HGNC (Human Gene Nomenclature Committee) 
for  denominating  name and symbol  of human  gene.  This 
database includes gene name, gene symbol, and alias symbol. 

6. Generic Genome Bn:Miser (GGB) 
We use GGB(Stein et at., 2002) (Generic Genome Browser) 
to  display  information  of  both  sequence  variance  and 
Human  genome  which  are  collected.  It  is  possible  for 
GGB  to  show  sequence-based  information  such  as 
genome  contig,  genome  information,  STS  (Sequence 
Tag Site), SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism), so on 
and so forth by track. And also the GGB is designed to be 
able to be  linked with  other databases as each of track 
information.  We  adopted  this  browser  to  indicate  the 
information of allele frequency entered by users. 

Result 
General overview 
To  store  and  search  pharmacogenomics  data,  we  de(cid:173)
fined  and  modeled  the  relationship  between  sequence 
variance  information,  drug  information,  and  phenotype 
information that describe pharmacokinetic or pharmaco-

org 
Gene_Symbol 
Gene_ Name 
Cytogenetic_ Location 
M  T ransitton 
Frequency 
SampleStze 
Subm1ttedby 
Subm1ttedPosition 

Phenot  eDataSetGeneAssoc 
'GeneiD  (Ff,} 
PhenotypeDataSetsiD  (FK) 

Phenot  eDatasets 
Phenoty peD ataSetsiD 

OataSetDisplayName 
DataSetDescipt1on 
DadaSetAbstract 
DataSetFtlename 

Phenotype  data 
'subject  1d  (FK) 
row  id 
attributef3 
vale 

Fig.  1.  Relationships among tables Databases of KPRN knowledge base 

70  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(3) 68-73, September 2005 

U•sr !nftl 
tJS@r Irl 
Name 
E-Mafl 
Role 

ijjat10 
!h~i:n: JJJng 
joocho%Pstlu,;;rc.'kr 
GA 

Group Jofo 
Group Id 

'Sf!Vwt 

TIC 
C/G 
TIC 
Cll 
A/G 
CIT 
G/T 
CIA 

SS/47 
7~/21 
85/15 
~{Zl 
38/6'2 
97/3 
100/1) 

B6/l< 
100/!l 

P!U'fc 
Plu$ 
Plos 
Plu1  FIMlnrl9 
PIU$'  r1•9 
Plki$  Flankinq 
Plus 
~~on 
Exon 
Plu; 
tntron 
Plu• 
E:->:on 
Plus 
Elron 
Pill$ 
E:x:on 
Plus 
Rlus 
El<on 

I 

'l/C 
111< 

OjH 
S/R 
11,10 
~/C 

:l58 
,sss 
35B 
4$$, 
!56 
';!SB 
3SS 
'lliR 
358 
201} 
J5S 
'3SS 

I 
I 

0 
!)' 

" 

Q 
0 
0 
0 
(! 

0 

Fig. 2. Web form for input data 

dynamic effect which is different in sequence variance for 
dosage. For the standardization of entering information for 
sequence variance,  we  use the Gene Symbol provided 
by Genew.  We accept MeSH terms as the standard for 
disease names in  phenotype data. The drug  names are 
taken from Aperon database. The relationship of each of 
information is illustrated in Fig. 1. In order to add literature 
annotation information, we have developed a system for 
inputting highly curated  annotation of each  gene, drug, 
and phenotype from documents published already. Fig. 2 
shows such a form through which users can input data in(cid:173)
to  the  system.  We  accomplish  the  visualization  of  in(cid:173)
formation of sequence variance by integrating the func(cid:173)
tionalities supported by the Generic Genome Browser. 

Detail explanation of the Model 
1) lnfamatioo of Sequence variance 
This part describes information of experiment about se-

quence  information  genotyped  (i.e.  allele  position,  al(cid:173)
leles, allele frequency, and amino acid transition and Gene 
symbol). Actually, the marking rule in indicating allele po(cid:173)
sition exists already. For example, "CYP2C9, Arg144Cys" 
means that amino acid transition occurs at the 144th po(cid:173)
sition of CYP2C9 gene, changing Arg to Cys. But the re(cid:173)
sult may vary depending where the experimenter count 
as the 1st position of the gene. Thus we adopt an abso(cid:173)
lute coordinate system by using GoldenPath position.  It 
prevents ambiguity which is caused by using relative po(cid:173)
sition  information  and we  need  it to combine  our data(cid:173)
base with the others. To mark alleles, we adopted the for(cid:173)
mat described below. 

The  notation of  amino acid  transition  is  designed to 
understand  one  or  three-letter  codes.  There  are  two 
categories  in  allele  frequency,  control  frequency  and 
case frequency. The former corresponds to searching for 
frequency in healthy volunteers, the latter in patients. 

We  used the  Genew system to  check what  gene the 

Development of a Knowledge Base for Korean Pharmacogenomics Research  Network  71 

Locus Type 
Alternative Symbols ~gg 

gene  witll  protmn product, function 

AliilSfi!S 
0\lerview 
The nucleotide 
involved tn  tr<'tnscmmcm¥cmJOh~!l 
fiHF2/TFHH 
hehcases. 
in  th;s 
c10n1pl!:tmentation group 

..  ""  &  ........ 

,-..a  MI. 

................ M  &&A  &M&  ~  A  JlMMM••-.A. £.A A.M.- A£  A 

.--........  ........ 

.11 

Gene  ERCC2 Variant Positions 

C/A 

100/i) 
100/IJ 

100/0 
48/52 

Minus 
Minus 

Exon 

S6 
55 

Fig. 3. Visualization of sequence information using Generic Genome Browser 

72  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 3(3) 68-73, September 2005 

Table 1. Marking Rule of Allele 

Mark 
N-
NG 

T/TCGGT 

G/TA(3) 

Attribute 
Deletion of A 

Single nucleotide change 

CGGT insertion 

TA repeats 3 times instead of G 

Table 2. The Category of Phenotype data 
Attribute 

Abbreviation 

co 
FA 
GE 
PO 
PK 

Clinical Outcome 

Molecular & Cellular Functional Assays 

Genotype 

Pharmacodynamics & Drug Response 

Pharmacokinetics 

information of a sequence variation be included by.  For a 
gene,  more  than  one  symbols  may  exist.  In  case  of  an 
alpha-1-B glycoprotein, alias symbols are A 1 B, ABG, GAB, 
HTSY2477 and so on. So, we need an official gene symbol 
that  represents them for  preventing  ambiguity caused  by 
redundancy. We use 23,449 official symbols now. 

2) Drug infomation 
We  use the  drug  database  made  in  Aperon  to  input  the 
name of drug. Presently, it is also used by PharmGKB. The 
Aperon drug database consists of 3,885 drug names, 9,176 
generic names, and 9,177 trade names. When users search 
or  retrieve  drug  name,  generic  name,  and  trade  name 
simultaneously, it gives proper drug name to users to use. 

3) Phenotype infomlation 
The phenotype that the gene in point shows when a drug 
is  administered  into  normal  group/patient  group  is 
described in  phenotype information. We  use the MeSH 
term  to  describe  disease  name  used  for  input  and 
classify phenotype into five categories used in PharmGKB. 
This system uses EAV (Entity-Attribute-Value) modei(Anjoy 
eta/., 2003) because each phenotype information is input in 
each category but cannot be input as unified or abbreviated 
form. 

information  of  pharmacogenomics 

4) Uterature Annotation 
We developed a Literature Annotation system to search 
for  the 
is 
published  already  because  we  intend  to  get  literature 
information which is highly curated by researchers. The 
Literature  Annotation  consists  of  PubMed  information, 
keyword,  abstract,  related  gene,  drug,  and  disease 
information that can be input and retrieved. 

that 

5) Visualization using Generic Genome Brolvser 
We  used Generic Genome Browser (GGB) to visualize 

information of sequence variance.  It is possible for GGB 
to show sequence-based information by tracks. Also it is 
designed to be able to be linked with other databases as 
each  of track information.  We  modified this  browser to 
indicate the  information  of  allele frequency  entered  by 
users (Fig. 3). 

Discussion 
This paper introduces the knowledge base for KPRN we 
have developed for storing and searching for pharmaco(cid:173)
genomics  data  with  integrated  biomedical  resources. 
The  system  includes  sequence  information  from  phar(cid:173)
macogenomic  experiment,  drug  data,  phenotype  data 
coincided with the drug data,  literature annotation,  and 
visualization of sequence variance information. We used 
thesaurus in MeSH, Genew and many standard systems 
for  building  the  knowledge  base  to  describe  gene  in(cid:173)
formation, drug information, phenotype information. The 
system enables to link with other public databases for in(cid:173)
put  information  and  helps  understand  pharmacoge(cid:173)
nomics data by means of visualization.  At present,  859 
genotype data sets are integrated for 91  genes by the 18 
research  groups.  The  number  of  input  data  will  ex(cid:173)
ponentially increase in the near future. 

Except for the PharmGKB in Stanford, there has been 
no standard for storing pharmacogenomics data. But we 
think  that  ours  is  a  valuable  effort  to  create  our  own 
knowledge base for understanding and using pharmaco(cid:173)
genomics data.  We  hope  it will  server for the  develop(cid:173)
ment of a standard for collaborative and integrative phar(cid:173)
macogenomics research. 

Acknowledgments 

This study was supported by a grant of the Korea Health 
21  R&D  Project,  Ministry  of  Health  and  Welfare, 
Republic of Korea (03-PJ1 O-PG13-GD01-0002) 

References 
Klein,  T.E.,  Chang,  J.T.,  Cho,  M.K.,  Easton,  K.L., 
Fergerson, R., Hewett, M., Lin, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, S., Oliver, 
D.E.,  Rubin,  D.L.,  Shafa,  F.,  Stuart,  J.M.,  and  Altman, 
R.B.  (2001 ). 
"Integrating  Genotype  and  Phenotype 
Information:  An  Overview  of  the  PharmGKB  Project", 
The Pharmacogenomics J.  1,  167-170. 

Kaiser, J. (2005).Aperon Biosystems. http://www.aperon.coml 

index.htm 

Schulman,  J.L.  (2000).  Using  Medical  Subject  Headings 
(MeSH)  to  examine  patterns  in  American  medicine. 
[course  paper,  STS  5206].  Falls  Church:  Virginia 

Development of a Knowledge Base for Korean Pharmacogenomics Research Network  73 

Polytechnic  Institute  and  State  University,  Northern 
Virginia Center 

Kent,  W.J.,  Sugnet,  C.W.,  Furey,  T.S.,  Roskin,  K.M., 
Pringle, T.H., Zahler, A.M., and Haussler, D.  (2002). The 
Human  Genome  Browser at  UCSC.  Genome Res.  12, 
996-1006. 

Karolchik,  D.,  Baertsch,  R.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Furey,  T.S., 
Hinrichs,  A.,  Lu,  Y.T.,  Roskin,  K.M.,  Schwartz,  M., 
Sugnet, C.W., Thomas, D.J., Weber,  R.J.,  Haussler, D., 
and  Kent,  W.J.  (2003).The  UCSC  Genome  Browser 
Database.  Nucleic Acids Res.  31.  51-54. 

Wain,  H.M., Lush,  M., Ducluzeau, F., and Povey, S. (2002). 
Genew:  the  Human  Gene  Nomenclature  Database. 
Nucleic Acids Res.  30,  1169-1171 

Stein, L.D.,  Mungall, C., Shu, S., Gaudy, M., Mangone, M., 
Day,  A.,  Nickerson,  E.,  Stajich, J.E.,  Harris, T.W.,  Arva, 
A., and Lewis, S .. (2002).The Generic Genome Browser: 
A  Building  Block  for  a  Model  Organism  System 
Database.  Genome Res.  12, 1599-1610 

Anhoj,  J.  (2003).  Generic  Design  of  Web-Based  Clinical 

Databases.  J.  Med.  Internet Res.  5,  27 

