Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  126-129,  September  2008

CGHscape:  A  Software  Framework  for  the  Detection  and 
Visualization  of  Copy  Number  Alterations

Yong-Bok  Jeong1,2,  Tae-Min  Kim1,2  and  Yeun- 
Jun  Chung1,2*

1Integrated  Research  Center  for  Genome  Polymorphism, 
2Department  of  Microbiology,  The  Catholic  University  of 
Korea  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  137-701,  Korea

Abstract

The  robust  identification  and  comprehensive  profiling  of 
copy  number  alterations  (CNAs)  is  highly  challenging. 
The  amount  of  data  obtained  from  high-throughput 
technologies  such  as  array-based  comparative  genomic 
hybridization  is  often  too  large  and  it  is  required  to  de-
velop  a  comprehensive  and  versatile  tool  for  the  de-
tection  and  visualization  of  CNAs  in  a  genome-wide 
scale.  With  this  respective,  we  introduce  a  software 
framework,  CGHscape  that  was  originally  developed  to 
explore  the  CNAs  for  the  study  of  copy  number  varia-
tion  (CNV)  or  tumor  biology.  As  a  standalone  program, 
CGHscape  can  be  easily  installed  and  run  in  Microsoft 
Windows  platform.  With  a  user-friendly  interface,  CGH-
scape  provides  a  method  for  data  smoothing  to  cope 
with  the  intrinsic  noise  of  array  data  and  CNA  detection 
based  on  SW-ARRAY  algorithm.  The  analysis  results 
can  be  demonstrated  as  log2  plots  for  individual  chro-
mosomes  or  genomic  distribution  of  identified  CNAs. 
With  extended  applicability,  CGHscape  can  be  used  for 
the  initial  screening  and  visualization  of  CNAs  facilitating 
the  cataloguing  and  characterizing  chromosomal  alter-
ations  of  a  cohort  of  samples.

Availability:  CGHscape  installation  package  with  online 
manual  is  freely  available  in  our  website,  http://www. 
ircgp.com/software/CGHscape. 

Keywords:  array-CGH,  copy  number  alteration  (CNA), 
copy  number  variation  (CNV)

Introduction

dented  challenges  in  a  biological  field.  In  case  of  ge-
nomic  analysis,  array-based  comparative  genomic  hy-
bridization  (array-CGH)  has  enabled  the  detection  of 
copy  number  alterations  (CNAs)  in  a  high  resolution  and 
has  been  used  for  the  analysis  of  cancer  or  congenital 
disorders  (Pinkel  et al.,  2005;  Yim  et al.,  2004).  It  has 
also  facilitated  the  discovery  of  large-scaled  structural 
variations  including  copy  number  variation  (CNV)  that 
comprises  a  substantial  amount  of  genomes  in  normal 
individuals  (Freeman et al.,  2006).  In  spite  of  the  techno-
logical  advancement,  the  identification  of  CNAs  is  often 
not  straightforward  largely  due  to  the  intrinsic  noise  of 
array-based  dataset.  A  number  of  algorithms  have  been 
proposed  to  detect  the  CNAs  (Lai et al.,  2005),  however, 
a  majority  of  them  require  considerable  experiences  on 
handling  of  large-scale  data  or  specific  knowledge  (i.e., 
R-package).  In  addition,  the  use  of  vendor-provided 
software  is  often  limited  to  certain  types  of  used  array 
platforms  limiting  the  general  use.  Thus,  it  is  highly  chal-
lenging  to  develop  software  that  can  be  used  with  rela-
tive  ease  and  those  equipped  with  versatile  methods 
that  can  be  applied  for  common  array-CGH  platforms  to 
ensure  the  extended  compatibility.
    Here,  we  propose  a  software  framework  designed  for 
the  identification  and  visual  representation  of  CNAs  us-
ing  genome-wide  array-CGH  profiles.  CNAs  can  be  di-
rectly  identified  from  log2  ratio  profiles  that  can  be  ob-
tained  from  array-CGH  datasets  with  minimal  modifi-
cations.  Data  smoothing  option  is  also  provided  to  cope 
with  the  noise  level  of  data  for  reliable  detection  of 
CNAs.  The  identification  of  CNAs  is  based  on  SW- 
ARRAY  algorithm  that  ensures  fast  and  robust  detection 
of  chromosomal  alterations.  The  identified  CNAs  are  ex-
ported  into  Excel-compatible  outputs  or  graphically  illus-
trated  with  graphic-user  interface.  Relatively  easy  oper-
ability  as  well  as  the  fast  processing  of  overall  proce-
dures  is  the  major  advantage  of  our  software  over  the 
conventional  ones.  CGHscape  software  package  is  free-
ly  available  and  provides  the  comprehensive  environ-
ments  for  investigation  of  tumor  genome  and  genomic 
variants.

The  advancement  of  high-throughput  technologies  such 
as  microarray-based  platforms  has  opened  unprece-

Major  Functionalities  of  CGHscape

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yejun@catholic.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-590-1214,  Fax  +82-2-596-8969
Accepted  7  September  2008

    (1)  CGHscape  was  designed  as  a  standalone  program 
compatible  in  Microsoft  Windows  environments.  Com-
piled  codes  of  CGHscape  can  be  easily  installed.  The 
interpreter-  or  web-based  methods  have  the  advantage 

Detection  Tool  for  Copy  Number  Alteration    127

Table  1.  Comparison  with  copy  number  analysis  softwares

Available 

Feature

for

Requirements

Platforms

CNA  Detection

algorithm

Scatter

plot

export

CNA
region
view

Run  time

Data  smoothing

Web  site

Reference

CGHscape

Windows

Standalone

SW-Array

Yes

Yes

Fast 

Moving  average, 

www.ircgp.com/s

aCGH  Smooth Windows

Excel

CGH  Analyzer Windows, 

JRE

Unix, 
Mac

Heuristic  algori-
thm,  regulariz-
ed  maximum  li-
kelihood,  Thre-
shold
T-test 

(multiple 
test  adjustment)

(＜1  sec)

Gaussian

oftware/ 
CGHscape

Yes

Yes

Slow

User-defined

www.few.vu.nl/

(4  min  40 
sec)

∼vumarray

Yes

No

Fast

N/A

www.genomics.u

(＜1  sec)

penn.edu/
people/faculty/
weberb/CGH/
html/
software.htm

ChARM  View Windows, 

JRE

EM  (Expectation 

Yes

Linux, 
Mac

Maximization

Yes Moderate
(27  sec)

N/A

function.

princeton.edu/
ChARM/

CGH-Explorer Windows,

JRE

ACE  (Analysis  of 

Yes

Yes

Fast

Moving  average www.ifi.uio.no/

Linux,
Mac

copy  errors)

(＜1  sec)

forskning/
grupper/
bioinf/Papers/
CGH/

Sample  data:  Copy  number  analysis  data  using  Phalanx  Human  OneArray(32K)  chip.

(Jong  et al., 
  2004)

(Margolin  et 
 al.,  2005)

(Myers  et al., 
  2004)

(Lingjaerde  et 
 al.,  2005)

from  non-profit 

of  being  independent  of  platforms,  however,  they  often 
sacrifice  the  overall  performance.  As  compared  with 
previous  softwares  with  similar  purposes,  CGHscape 
works  relatively  fast  and  it  is  one  of  the  major  advan-
tages  of  our  software  (Table  1).
    (2)  To  ensure  the  versatility  of  the  methods,  log2  ratio 
profile  can  be  directly  uploaded  and  analyzed 
in 
CGHscape.  Currently  available  softwares  for  copy  num-
ber  detection  are  often  limited  to  the  use  of  ven-
dor-specific  array  platforms  or  data  types.  In  addition, 
publicly  available  algorithms 
inves-
tigators  often  require  extensive  experiences  or  pro-
fessional  knowledge  for  large-scaled  data  handling.  The 
log2  ratio  profiles  can  be  relatively  easily  obtained  from 
array-CGH  datasets  ensuring  the  compatibility  regard-
less  of  the  array  or  data  types  and  data  flexibility. 
    (3)  The  inherent  noise  in  microarray  data  must  be 
considered  in  subsequent  analysis  and  this  is  especially 
the  case  of  oligonucleotide-based  array  CGH  (Ylstra  et 
al.,  2006).  In  case  of  genomic  log2  profiles,  the  probes 
can  be  sorted  according  to  the  genomic  coordinates 
and  data  smoothing  can  be  applied  to  reduce  the  noise 
levels.  For  the  robust  detection  of  CNAs,  CGHscape  im-
plements  the  Gaussian  smoothing  algorithm  as  well  as 
the  moving  median  or  moving  average  options  for  data 
smoothing.

    (4)  A  number  of  algorithms  have  been  proposed  for 
the  identification  of  CNAs  while  each  of  them  has  own 
merits  and  drawbacks.  SW-ARRAY  algorithm 
that 
adopts  Smith-Waterman  algorithm  in  scanning  and  de-
tecting  CNAs,  has  been  recently  proposed  and  notable 
for  its  high  sensitivity  and  robustness  (Price  et al., 
2005).  The  relatively  fast  performance  of  the  algorithm  is 
also  one  of  its  advantages  and  has  been  used  in 
large-scale  screening  of  genomic  variants  (Komura  et 
al.,  2006).  CGHscape  adopts  this  algorithm  for  the  de-
tection  of  CNAs  also  providing  a  number  of  options  to 
adjust  the  parameters  such  as  threshold  levels,  permu-
tation  levels  and  cutoff  of  scores.
    (5)  Graphic  user  interface  is  implemented  in  the  soft-
ware  for  the  users  to  easily  handle  large-scale  data  or 
access  the  analysis  results  (Fig.  1).  The  CNVs  identified 
can  be  also  visually  demonstrated  as  individual  chromo-
somal  plots  or  genome-wide  distribution  map  of  scat-
tered  CNAs.  The  CNA  regions  can  be  also  either  ex-
ported  into  tab-delimited  plain  text  or  Excel-compatible 
format  for  further  investigation. 
    In  conclusion,  CGHscape  can  be  a  useful  tool  with 
multi-functionalities  containing 
initial  screening, 
smoothing,  detecting  and  visualization  of  CNAs  which 
facilitate  cataloguing  and  characterizing  chromosomal 
alterations  of  disease  samples. 

the 

128    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  126-129,  September  2008

Fig.  1.  Screenshots  of  CGHscape.  (A)  The  main  frame  of  CGHscape  for  data  uploading  and  visualization  is  shown.  The  data
uploading  and  the  parameter  setting  of  the  subsequent  analyses  can  be  done  with  graphic  user  interface.  The  genome-wide 
log2  ratio  plots  are  shown  in  order  of  1pter  to  Yqter  for  all  chromosomes  demonstrating  the  chromosomal  gains  and  losses
in  red  and  green,  respectively.  The  selected  chromosome  can  be  further  shown  as  individual  chromosomal  plot  (below).  (B)
Log2  ratio  can  be  processed  for  Gaussian  smoothing  to  reduce  the  noise  level.  Above  (before  Gaussian  smoothing)  and  be-
low  (after)  log2  plots  clearly  shows  the  benefits  of  data  smoothing.  (C)  The  CNAs  identified  using  SW-ARRAY  algorithm  can
be  listed  in  table  formats.  The  list  can  be  exported  into  tab-delimited  plain  text  or  Microsoft  Excel  format.  (D)  The  ge-
nome-wide  distribution  of  identified  CNAs  is  illustrated  with  respect  to  individual  chromosomes.  Left  (red)  and  right  (green) 
bars  indicate  the  relative  genomic  gains  and  losses,  respectively  and  the  length  of  bars  indicate  the  length  of  CNAs.

Acknowledgement

This  work  was  supported  by  the  FG06-12-01  of  the  21C 
Frontier  Functional  Human  Genome  Project  in  Korea 
and  YB  Jeong  was  supported  from  Korea  Research 
Foundation  Grant  (MOEHRD,  Basic  Research  Promotion 
Fund)  (KRF-2007-511-C00051).

References

Freeman,  J.L.,  Perry,  G.H.,  Feuk,  L.,  Redon,  R.,  McCarroll, 
S.A.,  Altshuler,  D.M.,  Aburatani,  H.,  Jones,  K.W., 
Tyler-Smith,  C.,  Hurles,  M.E.,  Carter,  N.P.,  Scherer,  S.W., 
and  Lee,  C.  (2006).  Copy  number  variation:  new  insights 
in  genome  diversity.  Genome Res.  16,  949-961.

Komura,  D.,  Shen,  F.,  Ishikawa,  S.,  Fitch,  K.R.,  Chen,  W., 
Zhang,  J.,  Liu,  G.,  Ihara,  S.,  Nakamura,  H.,  Hurles,  M.E., 

Lee,  C.,  Scherer,  S.W.,  Jones,  K.W.,  Shapero,  M.H., 
Huang,  J.,  and  Aburatani,  H.  (2006).  Genome-wide  de-
tection  of  human  copy  number  variations  using  high-den-
sity  DNA  oligonucleotide  arrays.  Genome  Res.  16, 
1575-1584.

Jong,  K.,  Marchiori,  E.,  Meijer,  G.,  Vaart,  A.V.,  and  Ylstra, 
B.  (2004).  Breakpoint  identification  and  smoothing  of  ar-
ray  comparative  genomic  hybridization  data.  Bioinformat-
ics  20,  3636-3637.

Lai,  W.R.,  Johnson,  M.D.,  Kucherlapati,  R.,  and  Park,  P.J. 
(2005).  Comparative  analysis  of  algorithms  for  identifying 
amplifications  and  deletions  in  array  CGH  data.  Bioinfor-
matics 21,  3763-3770.

Lingjaerde,  O.C.,  Baumbusch,  L.O.,  Liestol,  K.,  Glad,  I.K., 
and  Borresen-Dale,  A.L.  (2005).  CGH-Explorer:  a  program 
for  analysis  of  array-CGH  data.  Bioinformatics  21,  821- 
822.

Margolin,  A.A.,  Greshock,  J.,  Naylor,  T.L.,  Mosse,  Y.,  Maris, 

Detection  Tool  for  Copy  Number  Alteration    129

J.M.,  Bignell,  G.,  Saeed,  A.I.,  Quackenbush,  J.,  and 
Weber,  B.L.  (2005).  CGHAnalyzer:  a  stand-alone  software 
package  for  cancer  genome  analysis  using  array-based 
DNA  copy  number  data.  Bioinformatics  21,  3308-3311.

Myers,  C.L.,  Dunham,  M.J.,  Kung,  S.Y.,  and  Troyanskaya, 
O.G.  (2004).  Accurate  detection  of  aneuploidies  in  array 
CGH  and  gene  expression  microarray  data.  Bioinforma-
tics  20,  3533-3543.

Pinkel,  D.,  and  Albertson,  D.G.  (2005).  Array  comparative 
genomic  hybridization  and  its  applications  in  cancer. 
Nature Genetics  37,  Suppl,  S11-S17.

Price,  T.S.,  Regan,  R.,  Mott,  R.,  Hedman,  A.,  Honey,  B., 
Daniels,  R.J.,  Smith,  L.,  Greenfield,  A.,  Tiganescu,  A., 
Buckle,  V.,  Ventress,  N.,  Ayyub,  H.,  Salhan,  A., 
Pedraza-Diaz,  S.,  Broxholme,  J.,  Ragoussis,  J.,  Higgs, 

D.R.,  Flint,  J.,  and  Knight,  S.J.  (2005).  SW-ARRAY:  a  dy-
namic  programming  solution 
for  the  identification  of 
copy-number  changes  in  genomic  DNA  using  array  com-
parative  genome  hybridization  data.  Nucleic Acids Res. 
33,  3455-3464.

Yim,  S.H.,  and  Chung,  Y.J.  (2004).  Current  status  and  fu-
ture  clinical  applications  of  Array  based  Comparative 
Genomic  Hybridization.  Genomics  &  Informatics  2, 
113-120.

Ylstra,  B.,  van  den  Ijssel,  P.,  Carvalho,  B.,  Brakenhoff,  R.H., 
and  Meijer,  G.A.  (2006).  BAC  to  the  future!  or  oligonu-
cleotides:  a  perspective  for  micro  array  comparative  ge-
nomic  hybridization  (array  CGH).  Nucleic Acids Res.  34, 
445-450.

