APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  95-97,  June  2008

A  Bio-database  Management  System  for  the  Monitoring  and 
Automatic  FTP  of  Public  Databases

informatics  site.  We  have  developed  and  constructed  a 
management  system  for  the  automatic  update  of  public 
bio-databases  by  implementing  several  programs  to 
monitor  and  automatically  FTP  them  at  CCBB  (www. 
ccbb.re.kr).  Currently,  the  system  supports  major  data-
bases,  such  as  GenBank  (Benson,  1994),  PIR  (Mc-
Garvey,  2000),  and  PDB  (Berman,  2000),  and  will  ac-
commodate  many  more  bio-databases.

Features  and  Results

The  system  is  composed  of  three  major  parts  (Fig.  1). 
The  first  part  monitors  each  database.  A  web  robot  pro-
gram  checks  the  version  of  each  database  by  a  sched-
uled  plan  that  is  controlled  by  a  scheduling  server 
program.  The  web  robot  program  accesses  the  version 
information  of  the  each  database  and  compares  the 
most  recently  updated  information  with  a  parser.  The 
comparison  and  scheduled  access  are  managed  by 
each  public  DB  entry,  which  is  stored  in  MySQL  DB 
(Table  1).
    If  an  update  is  detected  by  the  web  robot  program, 
the  second  part,  the  automatic  FTP,  is  triggered,  and 
raw  data  from  each  database  are  transferred  from  its 
FTP  site.  The  progress  is  monitored  by  a  web  status  re-

Hongseok  Tae1,  Jeong-Min  Han2,  Bu-Young 
Ahn3  and  Kiejung  Park1*

1Information  Technology  Institute,  SmallSoft  Co.  Ltd., 
Daejeon  305-343,  Korea,  2Korean  Medicine  Information 
Division,  Korea  Institute  of  Oriental  Medicine,  Daejeon 
305-811,  Korea,  3Contents  Convergence  Team,  Korea 
Institute  of  Science  and  Technology  Information,  Dae-
jeon  305-806,  Korea

Abstract

Many  bioinformatics  sites  have  managed  local  bio-data-
bases,  including  major  databases  such  as  GenBank  and 
PIR  with  update  load.  We  have  developed  several  pro-
grams  to  monitor  the  update  status  of  these  databases 
and  to  FTP  them  automatically.  These  programs  can  be 
used  for  maintaining  local  bio-databases  as  recent  ver-
sions  and  providing  up-to-date  databases  through  FTP 
sites.  Currently,  the  program  serves  major  bio-databases 
and  will  extend  to  accommodate  many  more  bio-data-
bases. 

Availability: The  trial  version  of  this  system  is  available 
from  http://gate.smallsoft.co.kr:8088/bioftp.

Keywords:  bio-database,  FTP,  GenBank,  monitoring, 
scheduling

Introduction

Bio-databases  have  been  produced  very  rapidly  in  num-
ber  and  quantity.  Each  original  database  that  has  pro-
duced  a  site  for  each  database  has  developed  its  own 
updating  system  for  the  database  internally  and  pro-
vides  it  publically.  Additionally,  many  bioinformatics  sites 
have  tried  to  maintain  many  databases  locally  to  pro-
vide  information  services  based  on  them.  As  each  data-
base  has  its  own  update  schedule  or  an  irregular  up-
date  scheme,  the  need  to  monitor  and  update  many 
bio-databases  has  been  a  burden  for  such  sites.
    CCBB  of 
Institute  of  Science  and 
Technology  Information  has  provided  major  bio-data-
bases  and  information  services  as  a  Korean  bio-

the  Korea 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  kjpark@smallsoft.co.kr
Tel  +82-42-864-2524,  Fax  +82-42-385-9240
Accepted  16  June  2008

Fig.  1.  The  system  structure  for  scheduled  monitoring  and 
automatic  updating  of  bio-databases.

96    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  95-97,  June  2008

Table  1.  Summary  of  control  data  for  scheduled  monitor-
ing  and  automatic  update  of  bio-databases

PublicDB

　Type

Public  DB  Information

db_id
db_name
description
ftp_addr

ftp_port
ftp_root_dir

public  DB  ID 
public  DB  name      ex)  GenBank

SMALLINT
VARCHAR  (20)
VARCHAR  (255) public  DB  description
VARCHAR  (20)

public  DB  ftp  address     
  ex)  ftp.ncbi.nih.gov
public  DB  ftp  port  number

SMALLINT
VARCHAR  (255) Corresponding  root  dir  of  the 

file_filter

VARCHAR  (255)

login_id
login_pwd

VARCHAR  (20)
VARCHAR  (20)

download_ip VARCHAR  (20)

  public  DB
file  type  of  public  DB  data   
  ex)  *.gz
Login  id  of  public  DB  if  necessary
Password  of  public  DB  if 
  necessary
ip  address  of  a  downloading 
  server  (the  node  with  parsers 
  and  schedule  programs)

TINYINT 

download_dir VARCHAR  (255) Downloading  directory
trigger_day
download  start  day  of 
  each  month 
The  last  downloaded  date  of   
  public  DB 
The  last  locally  updated  date  of   
  public  DB

downloaded DATE
  _date
updated
  _date

DATE

port  (Fig.  2A). 
    After  the  raw  database  is  downloaded,  the  third  part, 
the  local  database  update,  is  triggered,  and  parsing  and 
loading  programs  for  public  databases  are  executed  to 
construct  the  final  local  database.
    Many  databases  can  be  added  to  the  system  for  auto-
matic  update  using  a  database  entry  management  pro-
gram  (Fig.  2B),  which  supports  the  editing  of  database 

Fig. 2.  (A)  Monitoring  the  progress 
of 
(B) 
Editing  database  entry  information.

the  database  update. 

information  (Table  1),  including  addition,  deletion,  and 
modification.

Discussion

Due  to  the  exponential  growth  of  public  bio-databases, 
it  has  been  requested  that  the  integrated  management 
and  service  system  for  those  data  function  automa-
tically.  To  address  this  need,  we  have  developed  a 
bio-database  management  system  for  the  monitoring 
and  automatic  FTP  of  public  databases.  It  includes  the 
scheduled  monitoring  of  raw  data  updates,  file  transfer 
of  raw  databases,  and  execution  of  updating  programs 
to  reconstruct  local  databases.  The  developed  system 
can  be  generally  used  for  most  public  bio-databases.
    Local  databases  are  managed  by  several  DBMS, 
such  as  MySQL,  Oracle,  and  KRISTAL.  In  fact,  some 
databases  are  managed  by  MySQL,  and  some  data-
bases  are  managed  by  KRISTAL  at  KISTI.  Because  the 
local  database  update  programs  are  independent  of  the 
developed  system,  the  system  can  be  useful  for  the  up-
date  of  most  bio-databases  without  a  change  in  the 
programs.  A  more  convenient  program  can  be  devel-
oped  to  improve  the  system.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Korea  of  Science  and 
Technology  Information  grant  from  MOST.

References

Benson,  D.A.,  Boguski,  M.,  Lipman,  D.J.,  and  Ostell,  J. 

(1994).  GenBank.  Nucleic Acid Res. 22,  3441-3444.

McGarvey,  P.B.,  Huang,  H.,  Barker,  W.C.,  Orcutt,  B.C., 

A  Bio-database  Management  System  for  the  Monitoring  and  Automatic  FTP  of  Public  Databases    97

Garavelli,  J.S,  Srinivasarao,  G.Y.,  Yeh,  L.L.,  Xiao,  C.,  and 
Wu,  C.H.  (2000).  PIR:  a  new  resource  for  bioinformatics. 
Bioinformatics 16,  290-291. 

Berman,  H.M.,  Westbrook,  J.,  Feng,  Z.,  Gilliland,  G.,  Bhat, 

T.N.,  Weissig,  H.,  Shindyalov,  I.N.,  and  Bourne,  P.E. 
(2000).  The  protein  data  bank.  Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 
235-242.

