Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  4(3) 125-128, September 2006 

BioCC: An Openfree Hypertext Bio Community Cluster for 
Biology 

Sungsam  Gong\ TaeHyung Kim\ Jungsu  Oh\ 
Jekeun  Kwon\  SuAn  Cho\  Dan  Bolser-2  and 
Jong Bhak1* 

1Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (KOBIC),  KRIBB,  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea,  2MRC-DUNN,  Cambridge  CB2-2XY,  England, 
United  Kindom 

Abstracts 
We present an openfree hypertext (also known as wiki) 
web cluster called BioCC. BioCC is a novel wiki farm that 
lets researchers create hundreds of biological web sites. 
The web sites form an organic information network. The 
contents  of all  the  sites  on  the  BioCC  wiki  farm  are 
modifiable by anonymous as well as registered users. This 
enables biologists with diverse backgrounds to form their 
own Internet bio-communities. Each community can have 
custom-made  layouts  for  information,  discussion,and 
knowledge  exchange.  BioCC  aims  to  form  an  ever(cid:173)
expanding  network  of  openfree  biological  knowledge 
databases  used  and  maintained  by  biological  experts, 
students,  and  general  users.  The  philosophy  behind 
BioCC is that the formation of biological knowledge is best 
achieved by open-minded individuals freely exchanging 
information.  In  the  near future,  the amount of genomic 
information will have flooded  society.  BioCC can  be an 
effective  and  quickly  updated  knowledge  database 
system.  BioCC uses an opensource wiki  system called 
Mediawiki. However, for easier editing, a modified version 
of Mediawiki,  called  Biowiki,  has  been  applied.  Unlike 
Mediawiki, Biowiki uses a WYSIWYG (What You See Is 
What You Get) text editor. BioCC is under a share-alike 
license  called  Biolicense  (http://biolicense.org).  The 
BioCC top level site is  found at http://bio.cc/ 

Keywords:  openfree  hypertext,  bio-domains,  omics, 
bioinformatics,  biolicense 

Introduction 
The internet as we know it was formed in the early 1990's 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail j@bio.cc, 
Tel  +82-42-869-4318,  Fax +82-42-869-4310 
Accepted by 4 August 2006 

when  Tim  Berners-Lee  distributed  a  daemon  program 
called  HTIPD (http://www.w3.org/People/Berners-Leei 
Longer.html).  HTIPD  is  a  hypertext  text  processing 
daemon  or  server  that  runs  on  a  hardware  computer 
network (Bemers-Lee eta/., 1994). In the mid 1990s, many 
web sites using the HTIPD and HTML (Hypertext Markup 
Language) format sprang up (http.! len. wikipedia.org/wikil 
History_of_the_World_Wide_Web).  These  sites  were 
mostly static in that only the web masters can edit and add 
to the  contents of the information  provided  by the web 
servers.  However,  as  technology  developed  and  the 
general public started to access the Internet, there was a 
higher demand for more up-to-date information and more 
knowledge exchange (Cunningham eta/., 2001; Stephen 
eta/., 2006). This resulted in a new system thqt can be called 
an  "openfree  hypertext web"  (http:! len. wikipedia.orglwiki/ 
Web_2) (Kevin eta/., 2006). 

The major difference between the open free hypertext 
and the existing web service is that the open free hypertext 
allows clients to add,  delete,  and  edit web contents with 
minimum restriction. Often the web contents were also free 
(i.e., Copyleft). This seems radically progressive and risky 
in information management. However, that is in fact closer 
to the ear1y practice of using the Internet in the early 1990s. 
While openfree technology such as wiki was not widely 
available, the Internet became more restricted in the mid 
1990s. One of the major fields of science that benefited 
most  by the  advance of the  Internet  has  been  biology 
(Guest eta/., 2003). Biological data are complex, diverse, 
and messy to handle. Also,  human annotation is often a 
critical component of the biological data and its updates. 
Therefore,  many  large  biological  institutes  have  been 
running web sites with a remarkably open and free license 
scheme such as GNL (http://w.Nvv.gnu.org). The majority 
of such data and databases has been free (Holger eta/., 
2005; Kai eta/., 2006)1n that open culture, there have been 
various  community  projects  such  as  Bioperl,  Biojava, 
Biopython, and Biolinux (http.l/bioperl.net, http.l/bioperl.org, 
http://biojava.net, http://biojava.org, http://biolinux.net, 
and http://bidnforrretics. org). These individual projects have 
been  linked  by groups  of researchers who advocate an 
open, free, and fast exchange of biological information. As 
one such openfree project, we present BioCC. BioCC is 
a top level portal site for open hypertext web sites that use 
Wiki  (http://wiki.org).  The  concept behind  BioCC is the 
ongoing construction of a large scale network of wiki-based 

126  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  4(3) 125-128, September 2006 

web  sites.  BioCC  can  be  found  at  the  following  URL; 
http.!lbio.cc/. The history of BioCC and its diverse activities 
date as far back as 1996 with the first community project 
proposals for bioperl and biojava. BioCC's scope of activity 
is similar to those of http://bioinformatics.org, that has been 
successfully  implemented  some  years  later.  BioCC, 
however, is different in its philosophy in that it is intended 
to form a networked cluster of very specialized wiki sites 
that have a common license, templates, and a philosophy 
for sharing, instead of becoming one single top level portal 
site such as http://bioinformatics.org, http://google.com and 
http://yahoo. com. BioCC maintains over 1000 biologically 
relevant  internet  domains that function  as  dynamically 
changing nodes for the whole cluster. 

Overall, it forms a gigantic knowledge network database 
with  many volunteers from diverse backgrounds.  BioCC's 
development or evolution roadmap includes 1) a network of 
special knowledge domains, 2) a deep search engine that 
finds  database  entries  as  well  as  web  pages,  3)  an 
automatic  word  linking  for  an  infinite  number  of  word 
connections,  4)  anautomatic  renewal  and  weighting 
system for web  site interconnection,  and  5) an  artificial 
intelligence  knowledge  query  system  for  easier  and 
contextual  knowledge retrieval.  below the  BioCC  level, 
there are high level portal sites that are more abstract than 
specialized domains such as http://zincfinger.  org. 

Methods 
BioCC uses Mediawiki as the basis for developing its own 
WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) wiki program 
called Biowiki. Mediawiki is based on the PHP (http://php. 
net) programming language which is flexible, manageable, 
and scaleable. Mediawiki has its own simple wiki grammar 
called wiki markup. The wiki markup is a set of syntax used 
to format and edit Mediawiki pages. Many users who do 
not know the wiki markup find it difficult to write a wiki web 
page.  Although  Mediawiki  has  its  own  editing  tool,  it 
provides a limited set of functions to format a variety of 
HTML  codes.  To  solve  this  problem,  the  Biowiki  wiki 
program integrates a graphical editor called  FCKeditor 
(http://www.fckeditor.net)  as 
tool. 
FCKeditor enables an easy and intuitive editing in a visual 
and straight forward WYSIWYG environment. 

its  major  editing 

BioCC  farm  has  thousands  of  domain  names  that 
point to  a single  or  multiple  server  machines.  It  takes 
advantage  of Apache  (http://www.apache.org),  one  of 
the  most  common  HTTP  daemons,  as  a  main  server 
engine.  To  successfully  handle  hundreds  of  active 
Biowiki  sites  within  a  small  number  of machines,  the 
"NameVirtuaiServer" Apache module has been adopted. 

BioCC  has  2 dual  core  AMD  Opteron  275  processors 
and  1OGB  RAM  based  on  theFedoreaCore  version  5 
operating system with a 2.6.17 Linux kernel. 

The  virtual  web  sites  {called  bio-domains),such  as 
bioperl.net,  biocourse.org,  biocorea.org,  and  biopeople. 
org, are diverted to the Apache web server's virtual server, 
and  users  outside  access  the  bio-domains  as  distinct 
individual and international internet domains. 

Results 

BioCC, which is the mother of all the Biowiki operated sites, 
hosts hundreds of openfree hypertext sites for biology. 
Among them,  we  introduce the five  most active Biowiki 
sites (Fig.  1 ). They are 1) BioCourse.org, 2) BioPedia.org, 
3) BioSpecies.org, 4) BioPeople.org, and 5) BioCorea.org. 
Each  of these  sites  is  discussed  in  moredetail  below. 
However, there are many other useful sites, for example, 
omics.org and Variome.org. Omics is the top level directory 
site for all  the  new-omicsdisciplines in  biology such  as 
genomics, proteomics, and interactomics. Variome.net is 
for SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymorphism) related research 
portals. 

BioCourse.org (http://biocourse.org) 
BioCourse is an  open  information  archive designed for 
novice or intermediate level students and researchers in 
the field of bioinformatics, including general biology. There 
have  not been  many useful  educational  portal  sites for 
bioinformatics which deal with a wide variety of subjects such 
as statistics, computer systems, genomics, microbiology, and 
programming languages.  Internet users usually visit web 
sites of interest and  manage them by  using  Bookmark 
utilities. However, this is tedious to maintain and update. 
Also,  clients  (internet users) cannot actively add,  edit or 
remove the oontents of such web pages. In order to overoorne 
these  limitations,  we  have  developed  BioCourse.org,  an 
openfree  web  system for  the  exchange  of learning  and 
teaching materials. The purpose of BioCourse is to help 
students quickly grasp large amounts of information about 
research  methods  in  various  fields.  The  contents  of 
BioCourse can  be classified  into six main  categories: 1) 
Biolanguage, 2) BioTool, 3) BioSystem, 4) BioDatabase, 
5) Biolecture, and 6) BioJournal. Biolanguage deals with 
programming languages such as Perl, Java and Python. 
BioTool introduces biological and bioinformatics utilities, 
such  as  BLAST,  and  users  can  post their home-made 
utilities. BioSystem and BioDatabase deal with computer 
operating systems and  Database Management Systems 
(DBMS). Biolecture contains introductory course materials 

BioCC: An Openfree Hypertext Bio Community Cluster for Biology 

127 

B 

a:~ 

'tlJ  _, 

•!':;'"n-::;:'~ 

~11':7~~ 
•  ~OCIC 

·''•'""' J 
~~.J..~!J 

-~~~l 
•  t;::,t• 

-

-- -·--.... 

E 

• 
,:a;, 
u • .-; 
. , 
~--'  J 

Fig.  1.  Screen shots of BioCC and 5 Biowiki sites. A:  BioCorea.org, B:  BioSpecies.org,  C:  BioPedia.org,  0: BioPeople.org, 
E:  BioCourse.org,  F:  Bio.CC. 

and BioJoumal cites scientific joumals in the fields of biology 
and bioinformatics. 

BioPedia.org (http://biopedia.org) 
BioPedia  is an  openfree  encyclopedia  dedicated  to  all 
biological  glossaries  and  vocabulary.  An  enormous 
amount of terms and jargons in the filed of life science has 
been accumulated due to the rapid development of life 
sciences in the last couple of decades. Many novel terms, 
such as interactome and interactomics, have been coined 
in  this -omics era.  Even  bioinformatics,  genomics,  and 
proteomics are fairly recent terms. However, such -omics 
jargon  can  create  problems  in  communication  among 
biologists  due to ever-changing  definitions.  Hence,  we 
developed an openfree web-based encyclopedia with the 
aim  of keeping  technical  terms  accurate,  and  can  be 
modifiable in order to keep up with the rapid development 

in the life science. Biopedia will be utilized as a resource 
database  for  semantic  web  and  ontology  networks  in 
biology. 

BioSpecies.org (http://biospecies.org) 
BioSpeices is an openfree directory service for listing all 
the species in the world.  Its top level category has three 
major super kingdoms; prokaryote, eukaryote, and virus. 
It has amodel organisms section such as human, mouse, 
rat,  C.elegance,  and  E.coli.  BioSpecies  is  designed  to 
satisfy the  professional  needs  of biologists  rather  than 
general users. l'vbst of BioSpecies's pages contain dassification 
information from kingdoms down to subspecies, and a basic 
description of the organismsuch as scientific or common 
name, habitat, diet, genome size, and industrial productivity. 
Any newly identified organism wlhich  acquires an official 
authentication can be freely posted. 

128  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 4(3) 125-128, September 2006 

BioPeople.org (http://biopeople.org) 
BioPeople is a web based who's who service in a biology 
domain. It aims to maintain information about scientists in 
the  biology  fields,  providing  a  person's  profile  such  as 
affiliation  (s),  research 
interests,  collaborations,  and 
publication information. It aims to be a voluntary community 
site.  We  have  classified  groups  of scientists  by  region, 
research field, and affiliation, so that users are able to search 
for  researchers'  names  by  country,  research  field,  or 
affiliation. We selected the top level directory for people who 
are in life sciences related jobs. Biopeople is a publicly open 
utility  providing  cyber-communication  which  gathers 
information worldwide for life scientists to help connect them 
to each other. 

BioCorea.org (http://biocorea.org) 
Biology is an extensive branch of science, consisting of many 
research centers, companies, and laboratories. BioCorea. 
org  is an  openfree portal  site for scientists in  Korean  life 
science fields. BioCorea.org has been developed to facilitate 
communications among local researchers. 

Discussion 
We have introduced a Bio Community Cluster farm, BioCC, 
and its five major Biowiki web based services: BioCourse, 
BioPedia, BioSpecies, BioPeople, and BioCorea. Biowiki 
sites in BioCC form an organic information network whose 
contents are modifiable by anonymous users. While this 
enables a very fast and up-to-date knowledge exchange 
amongst internet communities, there can also be copyright 
problems that could cause originality disputes. To settle this 
possible issue, BioCC advocates a license scheme called 
Biolicense. Biolicense (http://biolicense.org) enables any 
human being and machine to openfreely share information 
and knowledge for a limitless number of purposes.  It is a 
share- alike license that aims to protect biological information 
and knowledge from being legally monopolized by a small 
number of companies, classes, races, and economic groups 

in the world. The most important aspect of BioCC is that 
it is based on voluntary contribution.  Users manage and 
maintain  the  information  in  BioCC.  If users  accept  the 
underlying philosophy of BioCC, that research information 
should be freely exchangeable through an open-minded 
community, BioCC can become a valuable human heritage 
that should be transferred to future generations who will live 
in the era of 'personal omics' such as personal genomics. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  by  M10407010001-06N0701-
00110,  and  M10508040002-06N0804-00210  grant  of 
MOST.  JKK  was  supported  by  R01-2004-000-10172-0 
(2005) grant of KOSEF. SSG would like to acknowledge all 
the supports of KOBIC in  his previous period of stay and 
thanks his colleagues at KOBIC and OITEK,  Inc. 

References 
Bemers-Lee, T., Cailliau, R., Luotonen, A., Nielsen, H.F., and 
Secret, A.  (1994) The World-Wide Web. Communications 
of The ACM 37,  76-82. 

O.mningham, W. and Leuf, B. (2001 ). The IMki Way Collaboration 
and Sharing on the Internet.  Boston,  MA:  Addison-Wesley 
Professional. 

Guest,  D. G.  (2003).  Four futures for scientific and medical 
publishing.  It's a wiki wiki world. B.M.J. 325,  1472-1475. 
Maier, H.,  Dohr, S., Grote, k., o'keefe, S., Werner, T., Hrabe 
de Augelis, M., and Scheneider, R.  (2005). Litminer and 
Wikigene; identifying problem-related key players of gene 
regulation using publication abstracts. Nucleic. Acids Res. 
33, W779-W782. 

Kai, W.  (2006). Gene-function wiki would let biologists pool 

worldwide resources.  Nature 439,  534. 

Kevin,  Y.  (2006).  Wiki  ware  could  harness the internet for 

science.  Nature 440,  278. 

Stephen,  C.  (2006). Wiki  and other ways to share learning 

online.  Nature 442, 744. 

