RAPID 

[ 

COMMUNICAT~ON 

Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 3(4) 172-174, December 2005 

Specificity of Intracellular Trans-Splicing Reaction by 
hTERT-Targeting Group llntron 

Heung-Su Jung, IByung-Su Kwon and Seong-Wook 
Lee* 

Department  of  Molecular  Biology,  Institute of  Nanosensor 
and  Biotechnology,  Dankook  University,  Seoul  140-714, 
Korea 

Abstract 
Recent  anti-cancer  approaches  have  been  based  to 
target  tumor-specifically  associated  and/or  causative 
molecules such as RNAs or proteins. As this specifically 
targeted  anti-cancer  modulator,  we  have  previously 
described a novel human cancer gene therapeutic agent 
that is  Tetrahymena group I intron-based  trans-splicing 
ribozyme  which  can  reprogram  and  replace  human 
telomerase  reverse  transcriptase  (hTERT)  RNA  to 
selectively  induce  tumor-specific  cytotoxicity  in  cancer 
cells expressing the target RNA.  Moreover, the specific 
ribozyme  has  been  shown  to  efficiently  retard  tumor 
tissues in xenograft mice which had been inoculated with 
hTERT-expressing human cancer cells. In this study, we 
assessed specificity of trans-splicing reaction in cells to 
evaluate  the  therapeutic  feasibility  of  the  specific 
ribozyme. In order to analyze the trans-spliced products 
by  the  specific  ribozyme  in  hTERT-positive  cells,  RT, 
5'-end  RACE-PCR,  and  sequencing  reactions  of  the 
spliced  RNAs  were  employed.  Then,  whole  analyzed 
products  resulted  from  reactions  only with  the  hTERT 
RNA. This study suggested that the developed ribozyme 
perform  highly specific  RNA  replacement  of  the  target 
RNA in cells,  hence  trans-splicing ribozyme will  be one 
of specific agents for genetic approach to revert cancer. 

Keywords: cancer, gene therapy, group I intron, hTERT, 
RACE  PCR,  RNA replacement,  trans-splicing ribozyme 

One  of  major  concerns  for  cancer  gene  therapy  is 
development of genetic approach to specific cancer cell 
retardation.  Especially,  specific  messages  associated 
with and/or causative to a broad range of human cancers 
are  now being  intensively identified  (Strausberg  eta/., 
2004).  Based on these specific messages,  large efforts 

*Corresponding author:  Email SWL0208@dankook.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-709-2905,  Fax +82-2-798-4733 
Accepted 2 December 2005 

to modulate cancers have been based on specific knock 
down  the  messages  using  inhibitory  RNAs  such  as 
siRNA or ribozyme, or transcriptional targeting using the 
cancer-specific promoters/enhancers (McCormick eta/., 
2001 ).  However, difficulties to specifically or completely 
down-regulate  the  oncogenic  transcripts  and  leaky 
promoter/enhancer  activity  in  normal  tissues  could 
restrain their usefulness. Thus, more specific and effective 
anti-cancer approach will be warranted. 

Tetrahymena  group  I  intron  ribozymes  have  been 
shown  to  revise  mutant  RNAs  which  are  involved  in 
human genetic or malignant diseases by  trans-splicing 
with the target transcripts, and moreover, reprogram and 
replace specific viral transcripts also by trans-splicing to 
selectively  stimulate  a  new  gene  activity  in  the  viral 
RNA-expressing cells (Lan et at.,  1998; Phylactou eta/., 
1998; Rogers et at.,  2002;  Ryu  et at.,  2003;  Shin  eta/., 
2004). Furthermore, we have recently developed specific 
trans-splicing  ribozymes  which  can  reprogram  cancer(cid:173)
specific human telomerase reverse tranocriptase (hTERT) 
RNA  to  selectively  induce  cytotoxin  gene  activity  in 
cancer  cells  expressing  the  target  RNA,  and  thereby 
selectively  retarding  the  growth  of  those  cancer  cells 
(Jung  et at.,  2005;  Kwon  et at.,  2005).  Importantly, this 
specific  ribozyme-mediated  selective  regression  of 
tumors was observed in mice which had been inoculated 
subcutaneously with hTERT-positive cancer cells (Kwon 
eta/., 2005). Thus, the hTERT RNA-targeting trans-splicing 
ribozyme  will  be  a  novel  agent  to  specifically  deliver 
anti-cancer genes into cancer cells by selectively targeting 
and  replacing  cancer-specific  messages.  Of  note,  the 
trans-splicing  ribozyme  will  have  the  advantage  of 
cumulative effects of reduction of target RNA level and 
simultaneous  induction  of  anti-cancer  gene  activity  in 
the target RNA-expressing cancer cells. 

In  this  study,  we  analyzed  specific  activity  of  the 
trans-splicing  reaction  in  cells  expressing  the  target 
RNA by the hTERT-targeting specific ribozyme that has 
been observed to induce in vivo tumor regression. 

Structure of hTERT -specific ribozyme 
A  specific  group  I  ribozyme  that  recognizes  uridine  at 
position  21  (U21)  of  hTERT  RNA  was  constructed 
because  U21  on  the  hTERT  RNA  was  the  most 
accessible  to  the  ribozyme  from  an  RNA  mapping 

Specificity of Intracellular Trans-Splicing Reaction by hTERT-Targeting Group I lntron  173 

P1  helix 

antisense 

-- .... _ -....  .... -- .... --

Firefly luciferase 

hTERT RNA 

Rib21AS-Fiuc 

-

.... 

-

....  3' 

Fig.  1.  Schematic diagram of the  hTERT-specific trans-splicing ribozyme.  The target hTERT RNA is presented with sequences 
around the splice site italicized. The ribozyme is shown with extended IGS and 3' exon sequences, firefly luciferase RNA, capitalized. 
Potential base parings between the ribozyme and the target RNA are indicated by vertical lines. Arrows depict 5' and 3' splicing sites. 

strategy,  and  moreover,  the  trans-splicing  efficiency at 
U21  was  superior to  any other sites  in  the target  RNA 
(Kwon  et  at.,  2005).  Internal  guide  sequence  (IGS, 
5'-GGCAGG-3') of the ribozyme was modified to harbor 
an extension of P1  helix and an addition of 6 nt P1 0 helix 
combined with a 325-nt-long antisense sequence against 
the downstream region (+30 to +354 residue) of U21  of 
the  hTERT  RNA  for  the  functional  expression  in 
mammalian  cells  as  described  (Kwon  et at.,  2005).  In 
addition, firefly luciferase RNA was inserted as 3' exon of 
the  modified  ribozyme,  designated  Rib21AS-Fiuc  (Fig. 
1 ).  SV40  promoter-based  expression  vector  was 
constructed to express the ribozyme in cells. 

This  specific hTERT-targeting  ribozyme  was  shown 
to  accurately  replace  hTERT  RNA  with  the  intended 
sequence attached to the 3' end of the ribozyme in cells 
as  well  as  in  test  tube.  In  addition,  the  ribozyme  can 
inhibit telomerase  function  in  the  cells  by  reducing  the 
amount  of  the  targeted  RNA.  Moreover,  the  ribozyme 
can  selectively induce cytotoxin gene activity or suicide 
gene  activity  in  the  hTERT  RNA-expressing  cancer 
cells,  and  thereby  specifically and  effectively  impeded 
the  growth  of  these  cells  in  xenograft  mice  which  had 
been inoculated with the human hTERT-positive cancer 
cells as well  as in vitro cell culture (Kwon  et at.,  2005) 

Specificity of intracellular trans-splicing 
reaction by the specific ribozyme 
RNA  tagging  approach  was  employed  to  analyze  the 
intracellular specificity of the ribozyme, Rib21 AS-Flue, at 
molecular level. To this end, we determined whether the 
ribozyme was reacting with RNAs other than the targeted 
hTERT  RNAs  inside  ribozyme-transfected  cells  by 
performing  RT and 5'-end  RACE  (rapid amplification of 

Trans-spliced RNA 

Unknown 

3'exon 

t 
l 
l 
l 

Splicing  Junction 

5' End RACE-PCR 

Cloning and Sequencing 

29 clones/29 clones 

100% Specificity 

Fig.  2.  Specificity  of  intracellular  trans-splicing  reaction  by 
specific trans-splicing ribozyme.  Trans-spliced RNA was reverse 
transcribed, and adaptor oligonucleotides were added at the 3' 
end of eDNA Then, the eDNA was amplified with PCR reaction. 
The  amplified  products  from  trans-splicing  reaction  between 
Rib21AS-Fiuc and  unknown  RNA were  isolated,  cloned,  and 
sequenced.  All  of  the  clones  showed  expected  sequence 
harboring the splicing junction site, which  is indicated with an 
arrow, with the ribozyme recognition sequence in target hTERT 
RNA (boxed) and the uridine at position 21  (circled). 

eDNA ends)  PCR  reaction  of  trans-spliced  products  in 
the hTERT- expressing cells (Fig. 2). 293 cells were used 
for ribozyme transfection. The cells were transfected with 
1 ug ribozyme expression vector using 4ul Lipofectamine 
(Invitrogen). Twenty four h after transfection, total  RNA 
was  isolated  and  reverse  transcribed  with  random 
primer.  The 3'  ends of eDNA  products were tailed with 

174  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  3(4)  172-174, December 2005 

dATP  using  terminal  transferase  (Roche),  and  adaptor 
oligonucleotides (TAKARA) were added to the end. The 
cDNAs  were  then  amplified  using  10  pmol  adaptor  5' 
primer (Takara) and luciferase 3' primer (5'-GCGCAACTG 
CAACTCCGATAA). We cloned the amplified cDNAs, and 
twenty nine different clones were sequenced. Then, the 
sequence  of the cDNAs  revealed  that  whole  analyzed 
products resulted from trans-splicing reactions only with 
the  targeted  hTERT  RNA,  not  with  any  other  RNAs, 
which strongly implied that the ribozyme reacted with and 
replaced only targeted cellular transcripts, hTERT RNA, 
with its 3' exon (Fig. 2). 

Although assessment of more trans-spliced products 
might be necessary, this result suggests that the group I 
intron-based ribozyme exert highly target RNA-specific 
trans-splicing  activity  in  cellular  milieu.  Therefore,  our 
ribozyme construct had  minimized the degree to which 
target RNA-negative normal cells could be harmed due 
to  nonspecific  transgene  induction  via  nonspecific 
targeting and RNA replacement. 

This study suggests that group 1-based trans-splicing 
ribozyrnes could be specific anti-cancer agents to stimulate 
transgene  activity  very  specifically  via  cancer-specific 
RNA replacement. Together with the development of an 
efficient gene transfer system, cancer specific RNA-targeted 
gene delivery strategy based on  RNA replacement will 
be of specific and  effective  utility for the  modulation  of 
human cancers. 

Acknowledegment 

This work was supported by Korea Research Foundation 
Grant (KRF-2001-015-DP0572). 

References 
Jung, H.S., Kwon, B.S., and Lee, S.W. (2005) Tumor-specific 
gene delivery using RNA-targeting Tetrahymena group I 
intron.  Biotechnol.  Lett. 27, 567-574. 

Kwon,  B.S.,  Jung,  H.S.,  Song,  M.S.,  Cho,  K.S.,  Kim,  S.C. 
Kimm,  K., Jeong, J.S., Kim,  I.H., and Lee,  S.W.  (2005). 
Specific  Regression  of  Human  Cancer  Cells  by 
Ribozyme-Mediated  Targeted  Replacement  of  Tumor(cid:173)
pacific Transcript.  Mol.  Ther.  12, 824-834. 

Lan,  N.,  Howrey,  R.P.,  Lee,  S.W.,  Smith,  C.A.,  and 
Sullenger,  B.A.  (1998).  Ribozyme-mediated  repair  of 
sickle  13-globin  mRNAs 
in  erythrocyte  precursors. 
Science 280,  1593-1596. 

McCormick,  F.  (2001 ).  Cancer  gene  therapy:  fringe  or 

cutting edge? Nat.  Rev.  Cancer 1,  130-141. 

Phylactou,  L.A.,  Darrah,  C.,  and  Wood,  M.A.J.  (1998). 
Ribozyme-mediated  trans-splicing  of  a  trinucleotide 
repeat.  Nat.  Genet.  18, 378-381. 

Rogers,  C.S.,  Vanoye,  C.G.,  Sullenger,  B.A., and George, 
A.L.  (2002).  Functional  repair  of  a  mutant  chloride 
channel using a trans-splicing ribozyme.  J.  Clin.  Invest. 
110, 1783-1798. 

Ryu,  K.J.,  Kim,  J.H.,  and  Lee,  S.W.  (2003).  Ribozyme(cid:173)
ediated  selective  induction  of  new  gene  activity  in 
hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site-expressing 
cells by targeted  trans-splicing.  Mol.  Ther.  7,  386-395. 
(2004). 
Ribozyme-mediated  induction  of  apoptosis  in  human 
cancer cells by targeted repair of mutant p53 RNA.  Mol. 
Ther.  1 0:  365-372. 

Shin,  K.S.,  Sullenger,  B.A.,  and  Lee,  S.W. 

Strausberg,  R.L.,  Simpson,  A.J.,  Old,  L.J.,  and  Riggins, 
G.J.  (2004).  Oncogenomics  and  the  development  of 
new cancer therapies.  Nature 429,  469-474. 

