A R T IC L E

Genomics  &  Informatics
Vol.  9(2)  85-88,  June  2011

DOI:  10.5808/GI.2011.9.2.85
pISSN 1598-866X    eISSN 2234-0742

An  Information-based  Model  for  an  Interactive  Web  Service 
with  Agricultural  Biotechnology

Chang  Kug  Kim,  Young  Joo  Seol, 
Dong  Suk  Park  and  Jang  Ho  Hahn*

Genomics  Division,  National  Academy  of  Agricultural 
Science  (NAAS),  Suwon  441-707,  Korea

Abstract

The  National  Agricultural  Biotechnology  Information  Cen-
ter  (NABIC)  constructed  an  agricultural  biology-based  in-
frastructure  and  developed  a  biological  information- 
based  database.  The  major  functions  of  the  NABIC  are 
focused  on  biotechnological  developments  for  agricul-
tural  bioinformatics  and  providing  a  web-based  service 
to  construct  bioinformatics  workflows  easily,  such  as 
protein  function  prediction  and  genome  systems  biology 
programs.  The  NABIC  has  concentrated  on  the  func-
tional  genomics  of  major  crops,  building  an  integrated 
biotechnology  database  for  agro-biotech  information 
that  focuses  on  the  proteomics  of  major  agricultural  re-
sources,  such  as  rice,  Chinese  cabbage,  rice  Ds-tagging 
lines,  and  microorganisms.

Keywords:  biotechnology,  database,  genome,  informa-
tion  model,  web  service

Introduction

The  genomic  information  from  humans  to  microorga-
nisms  is  rapidly  increasing  in  the  21st  century.  Today, 
technological  advances  in  the  fields  of  genomic  se-
quencing  and  protein  structure  have  led  to  the  develop-
ment  of  genomic,  proteomic,  microarray,  and  functional 
genomic  data  (Ann,  2008).  Biological  databases  have 
been  established  to  optimize  scientific  exploitation  of 
the  explosion  of  data  within  bioinformatics.  Bioinfor-
matics  databases  and  tools  provide  analyzed  results  to 
understand  the  basic  principles  of  molecular  inter-
actions  and  systemic  functional  behaviors  of  organisms 
(Russ,  2007).  With  the  continuous  elaboration  of  bio-
informatics  tools  around  the  world,  various  databases 
have  been  constructed  at  bioinformatics  centers  with 
gene  expression,  genetic  marker,  microarray  gene  fam-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  jhhahn@rda.go.kr
Tel  +82-31-299-1620,  Fax  +82-31-299-1657
Accepted  20  May  2011

ily,  protein  prediction,  and  functional  genetic  information 
(Kim et al.,  2010).  The  National  Center  for  Biotechnology 
Information 
(NCBI,  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)  pro-
vides  analysis  and  retrieval  resources  for  the  data  in 
GenBank  and  other  biological  data  that  are  made  avail-
able  through  the  NCBI  website  (Sayers  et al.,  2008). 
GRAMENE  (http://www.gramene.org/)  provides  genomic 
information  for  Oryza sativa  using  a  genomic  browser 
(Youens-Clark  et al.,  2008). 
    In  Korea,  biological  information-based  models  have 
been  developed  with  a  knowledge-based  approach  for 
functional  gene  prediction,  gene  data-mining  using  mi-
croarray,  and  protein-protein  interaction  networks  (Kim 
et al.,  2008).  The  Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (http:// 
www.kobic.re.kr/)  is  a  national  research  center  for  bio-
informatics  that  plays  a  key  role  in  various  areas,  such 
as  genomics,  proteomics,  systems  biology,  and  person-
alized  medicine.  The  Biology  Research  Information  Cen-
ter  (http://bric.postech.ac.kr/)  and  Biotech  Policy  Resear-
ch  Center  (http://www.bioin.or.kr/)  support  the  govern-
ment  in  setting  up  biotechnology  information  and  all  of 
the  relevant  information  provided  in  the  portal  site.  The 
NABIC  (http://nabic.naas.go.kr/)  has  constructed  an  agri-
cultural  biology-based  infrastructure  and  has  provided 
comprehensive  agricultural  biological  research  informa-
tion.  Major  functions  are  focused  on  biotechnological 
developments  for  agricultural  bioinformatics. 

Methods

Data  collection

The  biotechnological  information  on  agricultural  crops 
was  collected  from  the  Korean  rice  genome  project  from 
the  National  Academy  of  Agricultural  Science  (NAAS, 
http://www.naas.go.kr/),  the  Chinese  cabbage  project 
(http://www.brassica-rapa.org/BGP/),  the  microorganism 
project  (http://kacc.rda.go.kr/),  the  BG21  project  (http:// 
atis.rda.go.kr/),  and  universities  and  various  institutes  in 
Korea.  In  addition,  genomic  information  was  accumu-
lated  and  collected  through  several  collaborative  in-
stitutes  and  public  international  institutes. 

Model  design 

The  integrated  biotechnology  database  is  designed  to 
provide  information  on  the  genomes  of  agricultural  cro-
ps.  This  database  (http://nabic.naas.go.kr/)  has  six  major 

86    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(2)  85-88,  June  2011

Table  1.  Details  of  the  genomic  database  for  Chinese 
cabbage  (Brassica rapa),  rice,  and  Arabidopsis

Dataset

Chinese  cabbage

Rice

Arabidopsis

Contig
Gene
Marker
SNP
EST
Exon

Total 

  1,725

   −
   −

    716

15,265
25,750

43,456

    3,360
  50,717
    9,587
  72,304
171,805
193,605

501,378

    1,619
  30,853
    2,135

     −
     −

166,873

201,480

Fig.  1.  The  homepage  screenshot  of  the  Agricultural  Geno-
me  Information  Center,  which  shows  information  categories 
for  various  genomes  of  agricultural  crops.

categories:  genome  research,  gene  expression,  rice  mu-
tant  DB,  analysis  tools,  genome  annotation,  and  other 
databases  (Fig.  1).  The  platform  was  developed  using 
MYSQL  and  commonly  available  network  protocols, 
such  as  Hypertext  Transfer  Protocol  and  JAVA,  and  da-
ta  were  stored  in  an  Oracle  relational  database  manage-
ment  system  (Oracle  Database  10g,  Redwood,  CA, 
USA,  http://www.oracle.com/).

Results

The  NABIC  information-based  database  model

The  NABIC  was  established  by  the  NAAS  in  December 
2002.  NABIC  has  provided  resources  for  bioinformatics 
by  developing  several  bioinformatics  tools  and  con-
structing  integrated  genome  information  systems.  It  can 
be  accessed  using  a  web-based  graphical  interface,  and 
anonymous  users  can  query  and  browse  the  data  using 
various  functions.  The  integrated  database  provides  ge-
nome  information  from  the  website  (http://nabic.naas. 
go.kr/)  and  includes  not  only  simple  textual  information 
on  individual  genome  sequences  but  also  analysis  ta-
bles  and  genetic  markers  for  annotation.  The  database 
provides  information  and  analysis  functions  on  bio-
informatics  fields:  genome,  gene  expression,  microarray, 
gene  cloning,  gene  index,  genetic  maps,  and  genetic 
markers. 

Analysis  system  for  information-based  model

The  information-based  model  consists  of  multiple  sub-
systems:  genomic  research,  gene  expression,  rice  mu-
tant  DB,  analysis  tools,  and  other  databases.  This  mod-

el  database  provides  a  bioinformatics  framework  to 
study  biological  function  based  on  the  genomic  se-
quences  of  rice,  Chinese  cabbage,  rice  Ds-tagging  lines, 
and  microorganisms.  The  information-based  model  is  a 
source  of  annotation  for  genomic  sequences,  physical 
maps,  sequence  comparison,  and  gene  prediction.  The 
model  has  developed  a  portable  system  that  is  able  to 
handle  very  large  genomes  and  the  associated  require-
ments  for  sequence  analysis.  To  achieve  scalability  and 
consistency  of  annotation,  we  developed  a  system 
based  on  a  relational  database  for  rice,  Chinese  cab-
bage,  and  microbes.  The  analysis  tools  provide  a  com-
prehensive  range  of  tools  that  are  applicable  to  the  bio-
informatics  field,  including  Web  Blast,  Gene  Prediction, 
promoter/TF  Analysis,  Repeat  Sequence  Analysis,  SNP 
Analysis,  and  Protein  Structure  Analysis.  They  are  sub-
divided  into  menu  categories  for  convenience  and  are 
provided  through  various  software  packages,  such  as 
WebBlast,  FPC,  Glimer,  and  Phrap.  To  advance  ge-
nomic  research,  we  constructed  an  integrated  genomic 
browser  database  for  sequence  analysis  of  the  rice 
(Oryza sativa),  Arabidopsis  (Arabidopsis thaliana),  and 
Chinese  cabbage  (Brassica rapa)  genomes.  The  ge-
nomic  browser  database  provides  annotated  genomic 
information  from  43,456,  501,378,  and  201,480  records 
mapped  to  Chinese  cabbage,  rice,  and  Arabidopsis,  re-
spectively  (Table  1). 
    The  genomic  browser  provides  specific  genomic  anal-
ysis  through  four  different  view  panels.  This  browser 
shows  relationships  between  the  genomic  sequence  and 
annotated  data.  Consisting  of  four  viewable  panels  that 
are  accessible  by  clicking,  the  user  can  access  in-
formation  about  individual  genes  along  with  functional 
annotations  within  the  entire  chromosome  (Kim  et al., 
2009).  The  chromosome  panel  depicts  the  chromosome 
banding  region  for  selection,  and  the  overview  panel 
shows  the  locations  of  markers  and  genes.  The  detailed 
view  panel  shows  genomic  sequence  features  and 
genes,  as  predicted  by  the  FGENESH  (http://nabic. 
naas.go.kr)  analysis  program.  The  base  pair  view  panel 
exhibits  the  correlation  between  the  ancestry  of  in-

A  Web  Service  for  Agricultural  Biotechnology    87

Fig.  2.  A  snapshot  of  the  gene  expression  database.  The 
view  page  shows  individual  windows,  searched  by  clone 
number.

the  common  variability  of  pair-wise 
dividuals  and 
linkage.  In  the  comparative  genome  analysis  between 
the  Arabidopsis  and  Brassica  rapa  genomes,  users  can 
obtain  new  genetic  information  resulting  from  com-
parative  genomics  methods  and  identify  missing  regions 
within  a  single  genome.
    The  gene  expression  database  (http://nabic.naas.go.kr/ 
agic/expression/)  provides  an  integrated  web-based  tool 
for  automatic  multistep  analysis  of  gene  expression 
data.  It  uses  bioinformatics  tools  to  compare  and  eval-
uate  gene  expression  data  originating  from  treatment 
with  newly  developed  gene  expression  systems.  The 
current  version  contains  related  information  on  34,000 
expressed  sequence  tags  for  10  species:  rice,  wheat, 
maize,  soybean,  barley,  Chinese  cabbage,  tomato,  hot 
pepper,  mushroom,  and  Arabidopsis  (Kim  et al.,  2008). 
Both  methods  allow  a  more  general  approach  for  dis-
covering  the  underlying  structures  and  patterns  in  gene 
expression  data  than  previous  methods  and  can  be  a 
valuable  tool  for  revealing  the  complexity  and  fine  struc-
ture  of  plants  (Fig.  2).
    The 
(http://nabic.naas.go.kr 
/RDS/)  provides  comprehensive  information  about  mu-
tant  phenotypes  and  insertion  site  sequence  information 
of  Ds-tagging  lines,  which  generated  115,000  Ac/Ds  in-
sertional  mutation  lines  using  japonica  rice  (Kim  et al., 
2008).  The  rice  mutant  DB  has  five  major  menus  of  web 
pages:  a  Blast  Search  for  mutant  lines,  Blast  from  rice 
Ds-tagging  mutant  lines,  a  primer  design  tool  to  identify 
genotypes,  a  phenotype  menu  for  Ds  lines,  and  man-
agement  information  for  Ds  lines  (Fig.  3). 

rice  mutant  database 

Discussion 

A  challenge  in  the  postgenomic  era  is  complete  ge-
nomic  information,  such  as  proteomics,  metabolism,  and 
systems  biology.  Bioinformatics  centers  have  been  in-

Fig.  3.  The  homepage  of  the  Korean  rice  Ds-tagging  lines 
database.  This  database  shows  comprehensive  information 
about  mutant  phenotypes  and  sequence  information  of 
Ds-tagging  lines.  The  phenotype  view  page  shows  the  re-
sults  of  search  for  a  DS  line.

creasing  the  capacity  of  biotechnological  research  by 
improving  the  performance  of  their  services.  In  the  fu-
ture,  centers  will  provide  services  to  construct  workflows 
and  pipelines  easily,  combining  two  or  more  instructions 
to  solve  complex  biological  problems,  such  as  protein 
function  prediction,  systems  biology,  genomic  annota-
tion,  gene  pathway,  and  microarray  analysis.  Therefore, 
bioinformatics  centers  must  develop  an  integrated  net-
work  system  to  aid  the  navigation  of  genomics,  system 
biology,  metabolism,  and  proteomics  tasks.  The  NABIC 
was  established  in  2002  with  the  main  objective  of  ana-
lyzing  the  genomic  information  of  agricultural  crops  and 
provides  related  services  to  professional  genomic  re-
search  institutes  and  societies  (NAAS,  2010).  The  in-
tegrated  biotechnology  database  provides  genomic  in-
formation,  including  genome  projects,  gene  identification 
numbers,  genetic  markers,  genetic  information,  specific 
gene  sequences,  and  genetic  information  tables  for  an-
notation  in  agricultural  crops.  In  addition,  we  con-
structed  a  fundamental  system  to  analyze  massive  se-
quencing  data  using  next-generation  sequencing  tech-
nologies  and  have  contributed  to  the  application  of  this 
informatics  approach  to  agricultural  biotechnology  to  ex-
tend  the  usefulness  of  breeding  new  crops.  In  the  fu-
ture,  NABIC  will  provide  a  web  service  to  construct  bio-
informatics  workflows  and  pipelines  easily,  combining 
two  or  more  instructions  to  solve  complex  biological 
tasks. 

Acknowledgments

This  study  was  conducted  with  support  from  the  Re-
search  Program  for  Agricultural  Science  &  Technology 
Development  (Project  No.  PJ006651  and  PJ006758), 
National  Academy  of  Agricultural  Science,  Rural  Devel-
opment  Administration,  Republic  of  Korea.

88    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(2)  85-88,  June  2011

References
Ann,  F.B.  (2008).  Bioinformatics,  Genomics,  and  Proteo-
mics:  Getting  the  Big  Picture  (Biotechnology  in  the  21st 
Century).  Bioinformatics  9,  94-95.

Kim,  C.K.,  Baek,  H.J.,  Park,  H.J.,  Kim,  Y.H.,  Seol,  Y.J., 
Hahn,  J.H.,  and  Lee,  G.S.  (2010).  The  Activity  and  Web 
Service  of  Bioinformatics  Center  in  Europe.  The Journal 
of the Korean society of international agriculture  22,  1-7.
Kim,  C.K.,  Choi,  J.W.,  Park,  D.S.,  Kang,  M.J.,  and  Seol, 
Y.J.  (2008).  PlantGI:  a  database  for  searching  gene  in-
dices  in  agricultural  plants  developed  at  NIAB,  Korea. 
Bioinformation  2,  344-345.

Kim,  C.K.,  Han,  J.H.,  Shin,  Y.H.,  Park,  S.H.,  Yun,  D.W., 
Ahn,  B.O.,  Kim,  D.H.,  Park,  B.S.,  and  Hahn,  J.H.  (2009). 
A  genome  browser  database  for  rice  (Oryza  sativa)  and 
Chinese  cabbage  (Brassica  rapa).  Afr. J. Biotechnol.  8, 
5253-5259.

Kim,  C.K.,  Kim,  J.A.,  Kim,  M.S.,  Yun,  D.W.,  and  Kim,  Y.H. 
(2008).  The  Recent  Database  Construction  and  Web  Ser-
vice  of  Bioinformatics  Center  in  Japan.  Korean Soc. Int. 
Agri.  20,  272-277.

Kim,  C.K.,  Lee,  M.C.,  Ahn,  B.O.,  Yun,  D.W.,  Yoon,  U.H., 
Suh,  S.C.,  Eun,  M.Y.,  and  Hahn,  J.H.  (2008).  KRDD: 

Korean  Rice  Ds-tagging  lines  database  for  rice  (Oryza 
sativa  L.).  Genomics & Informatics  6,  64-67. 

NAAS.  (2010).  NAAS  Annual  report  2010,  National  Academy 

of  Agricultural  Science  (NAAS),  RDA,  Korea.

Russ,  B.  (2007).  Current  progress  in  bioinformatics.  Brie-

fings in bioinformatics  8,  277-278.

Sayers,  E.W.,  Barrett,  T.,  Benson,  D.A.,  Bolton,  E.,  Bryant, 
S.H.,  Canese,  K.,  Chetvernin,  V.,  Church,  D.M.,  DiCuccio, 
M.,  Federhen,  S.,  Feolo,  M.,  Fingerman,  I.M.,  Geer,  L.Y., 
Helmberg,  W.,  Kapustin,  Y.,  Landsman,  D.,  Lipman,  D.J., 
Lu,  Z.,  Madden,  T.L.,  Madej,  T.,  Maglott,  D.R., 
Marchler-Bauer,  A.,  Miller,  V.,  Mizrachi,  I.,  Ostell,  J., 
Panchenko,  A.,  Phan,  L.,  Pruitt,  K.D.,  Schuler,  G.D., 
Sequeira,  E.,  Sherry,  S.T.,  Shumway,  M.,  Sirotkin,  K., 
Slotta,  D.,  Souvorov,  A.,  Starchenko,  G.,  Tatusova,  T.A., 
Wagner,  L.,  Wang,  Y.,  Wilbur,  W.J.,  Yaschenko,  E.,  and 
Ye,  J.  (2011).  Database  resources  of  the  National  Center 
for  Biotechnology  Information.  Nucleic Acids Res.  39, 
D38-51.

Youens-Clark,  K.,  Buckler,  E.,  Casstevens,  T.,  Chen,  C., 
Declerck,  G.,  Derwent,  P.,  Dharmawardhana,  P.,  Jaiswal, 
P.,  Kersey,  P.,  Karthikeyan,  A.S.,  Lu,  J.,  McCouch,  S.R., 
Ren,  L.,  Spooner,  W.,  Stein,  J.C.,  Thomason,  J.,  Wei,  S., 
and  Ware,  D.  (2011).  Gramene  database  in  2010:  updates 
and  extensions.  Nucleic Acids Res.  39,  D1085-1094.

