Minireview 

Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  1 (1)  1-6, September 2003 

Challenges and New Approaches in Genomics and 
Bioinformatics 

Jong Hwa Park*' and Kyung Sook Han*2 

Historical Background 

'MRC-DUNN  Human Nutrition Unit,  Hills Road,  Cambridge,  CB2 
2XY,  England,  UK  and  Object  Interaction  Technologies  Inc. 
(OITEK), Seoul, Korea 
'School of Computer Science  and  Engineering,  lnha  University, 
Inchon, Korea 

Introduction 

The science of biology aims to answer the  question  'What 
is  life?'  in  the  most  systematic  manner  ever  developed. 
Modem  biologists  are,  in  fact,  as  philosophers  were  in  the 
past.  Bioinformatics,  which  will  likely to  be the future  name 
of  biology,  employs  information  processing  technology  for 
biology to  interpret  the  whole  life  process  as  a complex 
system  with  many  computable  layers  of  different  kinds  of 
elements.  The  layers can  be  encapsulated  as  classes  or 
components of abstract objects for analysis and simulation. 
Eventually,  the  layers can  form  a recursive  and  self-similar 
pattern  of  information  processing,  providing  a commonality 
in all the levels of life. As in fractal geometry, these patterns 
are  suggested  to  be  present  naturally  and  universally  in 
biology.  That  is  why  computable  enzyme  circuits  of 
metabolic  pathways  for  cancer  can  be  applied  to  the 
simulation  of  bacterial  interactions  and  even  the  socio(cid:173)
economical  behaviors  of  human  beings  (such  as  the 
Internet).  Remarkably,  because  of  the  extent  of  the 
challenges and the amount of data it produces, biology has 
proved itself as the  richest information field  in  science.  This 
new field  is  focused  on  genomes  as  they  are  the  most 
central data source in life on Earth. We will look at the multi(cid:173)
layered  problems  of  genomics  and  bioinformatics,  as 
mentioned above,  with  a new paradigm  of research  called 
'network biology'  from complex systems analysis approach 
of computer science. 

Keywords:  network  biology,  interaction  among  biological 
entities, protein interaction network 

* Corresponding authors: 
'E-mail j@bio.cc  http://bio.cc 
'E-mail  khan@inha.ac.kr,  Tel  +82-32-860-7388,  Fax +82-32-863-
4386 
Abbreviations: SNP,  single nueleotide polymorphism;  KEGG,  Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
Accepted 17 February 2003 

In  1920,  the  term  "genome"  was  proposed  to  denote the 
totality of all genes on all chromosomes in the  nucleus of a 
cell.  However,  only  when  Sanger  in  MRC,  Cambridge 
published  the  first  genomes  of  virus  and  mitochondria  in 
1970s and  1980s,  bioinformatists  could  make  the  list  of 
protein  inventory  in  cells.  Instead  of  the  traditional 
reductionist' s approach  to  analyzing  small  aspects  of 
genes  and  proteins,  biologists  started  analyzing  whole 
systems of  life.  Inevitably, this meant more theoretical  and 
computational  paradigms  were  required.  In  1995,  the  first 
free-living  bacterial  genome  Haemophilus  influenzae  was 
published  (Fleischmann eta/.,  1995). Bioinformatists could 
analyse how genes were duplicated within single genome. 
It  can  be  called  'individual  genomics' . Soon,  more  com(cid:173)
plete genomes such as Mycoplasma genitalium and yeast 
were  published.  So,  a new  field  called  'comparative 
genomics'  became  possible  to  study  how  homologous 
genes  evolved  in  different  organisms.  Around  this  time, 
based  on  molecular  hybridization  technique,  very  large 
scale  mRNA  expression  data  became  available.  This  let 
biologists  analyse  thousands  of  gene  expression  within  a 
short time  and  computationally analyse the  significance of 
molecular  interactions  between  them.  This  was  probably 
the  most  important development for  another field  called 
'functional  genomics' . Functional  genomics  focuses  on 
the  interactions  and  subsequent  functions  of  genes. 
However,  before  these  relatively  recent  genomics  fields, 
structural  biology  now  known  as  structural  genomics  has 
been the main research in bioinformatics. Since the first 30 
structure  of  proteins  solved  by  Max  Perutz  and  his 
colleagues in  1950s and 1960s, bioinformatists have been 
studying  the  physical  mechanisms  of  protein  folding.  This 
involves  topics  that  deal  with  sequence  search  and 
alignment, structure predictions,  molecular interactions and 
docking  and  functional  analysis.  One  of  the  aims  of  such 
biophysical  informatics  was  to  eventually  engineer  and 
design  proteins  for  medical  usage.  In  doing  so,  bioin(cid:173)
formatists employed many computational algorithms, which 
are  essentially the founding tools  of general  bioinformatics 
we  know  of.  In  summary,  modern  genomics  have  the 
following  subfields,  namely,  individual  genomics, 
comparative  genomics,  functional  genomics  and  structural 
genomics.  All  these  fields  are  informatics  research  by 
nature (Fig.  1.) 

2  Genomics &  Informatics Vol.  1 (1) 1-6, September 2003 

Comparative 
Genomics 

Bioinformatics 

Structural 
Genomics 

Fig. 1. Genomics fields linked by bioinformatic methods. 

Challenging Aspects in Genomics 

In  each  genomics  subfields,  there  are  frontier  projects 
where  new  techniques  and  insights  are  needed.  For 
individual genomics the following problems are important. 

Individual genomics: 
1} Complete  mapping of evolutionary relationship between 
non-redundant  gene  sets  in  genomes,  such  as  the 
human  genome.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  about 
30,000  genes  in  human  genome.  However,  most  of 
them  have  homologues  within  the  genome.  Therefore 
distinctive  genes  or  proteins  may  not  exceed  5,000.  In 
other words,  there  is  a very  significant  degree  of 
redundancy.  Mapping  all  the  redundant  genes  and 
subtle differences between them is also very important. 

2} Genes are composed  of modules.  The  most useful  unit 
in  the  study  of  proteins  using  bioinformatics  is  often 
called  domains  and  motifs.  The  functional  diversity of 
human body comes from the combinatorial assembly of 
such  modular  units.  Surprisingly,  bioinformatists  have 
found  there  are  only  1 ,000  kinds  of  different  protein 
domain  structures  in  nature,  which  would  not exceed 
2,000  when  proteins  are  completely catalogued  So, 
elucidating the relationships of these combined domains 
and  functions  will  result  in  a kind  of  biological  periodic 
table. 

3) Genome  structure  (DNA  level)  and  subsequent 
regulation  mechanism.  It  is  not  clear why  the  present 
organization  has been  selected for the human genome. 
This  must  be  related  to  its  control  mechanism  unless 
there  are  some  physical  restraints.  For the  under(cid:173)
standing  of  genetic  regulation,  detailed  information  on 
gene  organization  in  relation  to  expression  and 
metabolic pathway is necessary. 

Comparative genomics 
1) Reliable  and  complete  set of genome  based taxonomy 
is  required.  Many  proteins  share  structures  and  widely 
spread  in  many different taxonomic branches of life.  By 
comparing  the  distribution  of  proteins,  it  is  possible  to 
map their evolution and to predict their functions . This is 
a part of the  bigger project that  is  named  as  'mapping 
protein universe' . 

2) Comparative  structural  genomics.  Even  though  protein 
structures often  have a canonical  fold,  they differ subtly 
depending  on  their functions.  This  is  why  one  protein 
fold  may  have  dramatically  different functions  (such  as 
gamma  crystalline  structure  which  also  works  as  an 
enzyme).  By  categorizing  the  subtle  differences  on  the 
surface  of  proteins,  we  can  make  databases  of  protein 
functional  surfaces  for  protein  domains.  This  will 
enhance drug discovery dramatically. 

3) Application  of  comparative  genomics  to  detection  and 
classification  of  species.  The  presently  known 
microorganisms are a biased set of culturable species in 
nature.  By  developing  diagnostic tools  using  the 
difference  between  genomes,  it  is  possible  to  expand 
the study of genomes toward organisms that are difficult 
to grow. Diagnostic genome chips can be an example of 
this. This may lead us to discovering new pathogens. 

4) Small  variations  in  gene  sequences  and  their effect  on 
chemicals.  Single  nucleotide  polimorphism  (SNP)  is  a 
high-resolution  comparative  genomics  between  very 
closely related  genomes such  as different human  races 
and  primates.  This  is  often  regarded  as  an  important 
research  field  for  possibly  different  drug  response  to 
slightly different genes. 

Functional genomics 
DNA  chips  received  a lot  of  attention  when  first  widely 
introduced. However, the quality of the data they produced 
was not often reliable for analysis. Also,  mRNA expression 
level that the  DNA chips measure is not directly co-related 
to  the  expression  levels  and  subsequent  effect  levels  of 
protein  function.  Now,  protein  chips  are  available  and  the 
functional  genomics  using  such  DNA with  protein  chips 
data will result in much more reliable data. 
1 ) Database  management for  large  scale  chip  data  is  not 
trivial.  Standardization  is  necessary  with  format 
conversion.  Also,  automatic  data  uploading  and 
downloading servers are necessary. The task should be 
coordinated  by  an  international  organization.  Many 
different  conditions  used  in  large  scale  expression 
experiment  are  critical  to  analysis.  Object  oriented  or 
relational database systems are suitable for this. 

2) Efficient  algorithms for clustering,  large  scale  automatic 
data  mining,  and  visualization  are  required.  Due  to  the 

Challenges and New Approaches in Genomics and Bioinformatics  3 

size  of  variables  involved,  it  is  an  absolute  requirement 
to  develop  a  set  of  very  efficient  and  highly  integrated 
bioinfrastructure. 

3) Fully  automatic and  yet reliable  annotation  system.  The 
literature information, sequence, structure and other less 
automated  information  are  to  be  combined  into  an 
automatic  annotation  system.  Recently,  text  parsing 
algorithms  are  actively  developed  for this  purpose. 
However, the reliability is an  important problem yet to be 
solved.  In  addition to  devising  more  powerful  automatic 
annotation system such as natural language processing, 
it  is  necessary  to  establish  a standard  form  for  storing 
data. 

Structural genomics 
Structural genomics is  perhaps the core  of  genome study. 
This  is  because  structure  is  the  most definite  way of 
representing  genetic entity.  The  major  issues  in  structural 
genomics are: 
1) Completing the  list of  all the  protein  folds  in  nature  and 
classifying  them  in  a  biological  meaningful  scheme. 
There  are  numerous  protein  structure  classification 
systems  and  they  need  to  be  coordinated  to  be 
accessed efficiently. 

2) Protein  structural  interface  classification.  Protein  folds 
interact with  other  proteins through  their  surfaces.  A 
major new task of structural genomics is to map all such 
surfaces according to interactions and functions. 

3) RNA structures.  RNA is  an  important part of genomics. 
However,  due to the  difficulty in  solving  the structure of 
RNA, the problem has not been tackled effectively yet. A 
major challenge  in  structural  genomics  is  to  develop  a 
very fast and  large scale determination  method  of  RNA 
structures. 

Genomics as Network Biology 

The layers of biology,  such as genomic layer,  protein layer 
and metabolic pathway layer,  can be best represented and 
analyzed  as computable  networks.  All  biological  entities 
can  be  represented  as  networks,  and  we  posit  that 
networks  are  the  ultimate  representation  of  all  life 
processes.  For example,  a protein is a network or graph  in 
which  nodes  represent  amino  acids  and  edges  represent 
chemical  forces.  Each  of  the  20  amino  acids,  in  turn,  can 
be  represented as a network of atoms of carbon,  nitrogen, 
oxygen  and  so  on.  This  can  go  down  as  far  as  the 
boundary of  matter  and  non-matter  or  go  up  as  far  as  or 
beyond  two  humans  having  a  conversation.  The 
conversation  can  be  regarded  as  information  processing 
with  a  relatively  precise  syntax  and  a  highly  context 
dependent  grammar,  which  is  essentially  the  same 

process  as  two  proteins  interacting  probabilistically to 
produce  some  biological  functions.  DNA or  genome  has 
already  been  suggested  as  a  dynamic  storage  of  a 
language  system  as  early  as  1980s  (Searls,  D.B,  1993) 
with  precise  computable  finite  states.  Recent  research  in 
complex systems  (Bianconi  and  Barabasi,  2001)  has  also 
suggested  some  far  reaching  commonality  in  the 
organization  of  information  in  problems  from  biology, 
computer science  and  physics  such  as  the  Bose-Einstein 
condensate, which is a special state of matter. 

However,  only  in  the  last  5  or  so  years,  has 
bioinformatics truly  shifted  its  focus from  individual  genes, 
proteins,  structures and  search  algorithms to the viewpoint 
of  large-scale networks.  Suddenly,  biologists find  the  links 
between  the  internet  and  metabolic  pathways,  structural 
interactions  of  proteins  via  a network topology  (scale-free 
network  (Jeong,  eta!.,  2000).  We  are  becoming  more 
certain  that the  future  of  biology  lies  in  the  networks  of 
biological  entities.  Then,  what  are  the  challenges  and 
future  trends  for the  network  biology?  Three  main 
challenges  lie  ahead  in  network  biology.  They  are  1) 
representing  biological  entities  and  making  databases,  2) 
mapping  the  networks  efficiently  and  3)  modeling, 
simulating,  analysing  and  predicting  the  networks.  The 
critical  problems  of  all  the  networks  boil  down  to  physical 
and  informational  'interactions'  among  biological  entities. 
Hence, the above challenges are best tackled by mapping 
the  entities  with  interaction  maps  or  networks.  In  building 
such  interaction  networks,  proteins are the  most useful  for 
us.  However,  only  recently  have  we  observed  new 
research  outcomes on  large scale  identification  of proteins 
and  mapping of their interactions even  though  proteomics 
started  as  early  as  1980s  when  Sanger  group  in 
Cambridge tried  to verify  the  expressed  genes from 
complete  genomes.  Due  to  its  difficulty and  importance, 
mapping  protein  interaction  is  perhaps  comparable  to  the 
human  genome  project.  Until  new  technologies  for  more 
sophisticated  and  large-scale detection methods for  many 
different kinds of chemicals in cells, the protein entities and 
their networks will  occupy the core of future  bioinformatics 
research.  The following  paragraphs show where  important 
information on protein networks come from. 

Protein Interaction Networks 

The  interactions  of  protein  entities  (commonly the  protein 
domains and their complex)  can  be  represented differently 
and found (the first challenge) in many different forms. Four 
major forms are explained here. 

Biological data from literature 
The first and most obvious one  is the  literature of all kinds 

4  Genomics & Informatics Vol.  1{1) 1-6, September2003 

of  biological  fields.  Many biological  articles  provide  some 
degree  of  protein  interaction  information.  The  main 
problem of this form  is that the signal to  noise  ratio  is poor 
due  to  massively  irrelevant  and  confusing  text  bodies. 
Therefore,  they need to be parsed  logically,  predicted and 
verified.  Artificial  intelligence  techniques,  including  natural 
language processing,  are often  employed with  reasonable 
success.  In  the  future,  with  the  data  mining  processes 
included,  the  whole  literature  itself will  form  a giant 
biological  entity which,  in  essence,  is  not  much  different 
from  a whole  genome  (a  textome,  Tsoka  and  Ouzounis, 
2000, or archiome). 

Metabolic data source 
The  second  form  comes  from  the  metabolic  pathways 
information.  Interactions  in  this  case  are  often  linked  by 
biological  substrates  within  directed  graphs  or circuits  of 
enzymes.  A good  example  of  this  representation  is  the 
KEGG.  Practically,  this  representation  is  close  to  the 
electronic circuits of switches. When,  seemingly distributed 
biological  entities  interact with  each  other with  a switching 
mechanism,  certain  emergent  properties  occur  and  the 
whole circuit becomes alive or starts to control and process 
the information flow (Walhout, 2000). The physical material 

for  the  processing  is  often  associated  with  energy  in 
chemical  forms.  Finding  regulatory  principles  and  rules  is 
critical to correctly analyzing this form of interaction data. 

Genetic interaction data source 
The third form  of interaction is found  in  molecular genetics 
methods such as yeast two hybrid system  (Y2H,  Walhout, 
2000).  This  method  in  a massively  large  scale  produces 
genetically predicted or verified protein  interactions. Whole 
genome  scale  interaction  experiments  are  now  possible 
(Uetz et at.,  2000).  Due to the volume  of data,  a graphical 
representation of protein-protein interactions has proven to 
be much easier to understand than a long list of interacting 
proteins. However, visualizing protein-protein interactions is 
not  easy,  even  for  relatively  simple  organisms  such  as 
yeast.  Fig.  2,  for example,  shows  the  largest connected 
component  of the  Y2H  data,  visualized  by  a 3D  layout 
program. 

Structural interaction data source 
The last and probably the most precise one is coming from 
the  physical  and  structural  interactions  between  proteins. 
Proteomics  data from  mass  spectrometry  can  provide 
relatively  reliable  physical  interactions  of  proteins  with 

Fig. 2. Network of the largest connected component of the Y2H data, containing 473 nodes and 543 edges. 

O_W I  __  _ 

Challenges and New Approaches in Genomics and Bioinformatics  5 

identification  of  new  proteins.  Another valuable  source  is 
the  PDB  (Protein  Data  Bank),  in  which  3D  coordinate 
values  of  protein  structures  are  stored.  Using  the  precise 
3D  structure,  protein  interactions  can  be  generalized  and 
drawn in a map, which  encompasses all the  known  protein 
topologies  and  their  interactions  (Uetz  et a/.,  2000).  The 
advantage  of  this  interaction  map  is  that  it can  reveal  the 
evolutionary  paths  of  interactions  as  it  lies  at  the  protein 
family  level  rather  than  at  the  individual  protein  level  (Fig. 
3). 
Not only  the  above  four  different  sources  of  interaction 
networks  can  form  different  layers  of  infrastructure  in 
bioinformatics, but they also overlap and interact with each 
other,  resulting  in  a  super-network  of  information.  This 
pattern  will  recurse,  eventually  forming  a  tightly yet 
probabilistically  controlled  network  called  life  as  modeled 
by human beings (as humans can only model it), whether it 
is called Gaia, Galaxia or something else. 

molecule to the Internet have refused so far to  be  mapped 
precisely  and  predicted  successfully  by  mathematicians, 
physicists  or  computer  scientists.  Genomics  and 
bioinformatics  are  the  fields  that  process  such  complex 
data.  The  insights  on  the  nature  of  biological  entities  as 
complex interaction  networks are opening a door toward a 
generalization  of  the  representation  of  biological  entities. 
The  main  challenge  of  genomics  and  bioinformatics  now 
lies  in  1)  how to data mine the  networks of the domains of 
bioinformatics,  namely,  the  literature,  metabolic  pathways, 
and proteome and structures, in terms of interaction; and 2) 
how  to  generalize  the  networks  in  order to  integrate  the 
information  into  computable  genomic  data  for  computers 
regardless  of  the  levels  of  layer.  Once  bioinformatists 
succeed to find a general principle on the way components 
interact each  other to form  any organic interaction  network 
at  genomic  scale,  true  simulation  and  prediction  of  life  in 
silico will be possible. 

Summary 

Acknowledgments 

In  conclusion,  the  seemingly  fuzzy  and  disorganized  data 
of  biology  with  thousands  of  different  layers  ranging  from 

Authors were supported  by the  Ministry of Information and 
Communication  of  South  Korea  under grant  number  IMT 

1 81 

4~21 

"7221 

2343 
/ 

Fig. 3.  Part of  PSIMAP  (Protein  Structural  Interaction  Map,  Park et al.,  2001),  which  shows  all  the  known  protein fold  interactions.  The 
interactions are phylogenetic, i.e., it is based on evolutionarily determined family-family interactions. It works as the basic skeleton of more 
specific protein-protein  interactions.  Protein  families  directly interacting  with  protein family  3.2.1  {shown  in  blue color)  are  highlighted  by 
yellow color. 

6  Genomics &  Informatics Vol.  1 (1) 1-6, September 2003 

2000-C3-4. 

References 

Bianconi, G. and Barabasi, A.  (2001) Bose-Einstein condensation 
in complex networks. Physical Review Letters, 86, 5632-5635. 
Fleischmann,  R.D.,  Adams,  M.D.,  White,  0.,  Clayton,  R.A., 
Kirkness,  E.F.,  Kerlavage,  A.R.,  Bult,  C.J.,  Tomb,  J.F., 
Dougherty,  B.A.,  Merrick,  J.M.,  eta/.  (1995)  Whole-genome 
random  sequencing  and assembly of  Haemophilus influenzae 
Rd. Science, 269, 496-512. 

Jeong,  H.,Tombor,  B.,  Albert,  R.,  Oltvai, Z.N.,  and  Barabasi, A.L., 
(2000)  The  large-scale  organization  of  metabolic  networks. 
Nature, 407, 651-654. 

Park, J., Lappe, M., and Teichmann, S.A.  (2001) Mapping protein 
family  interactions:  intramolecular and  intermolecular  protein 
family interaction repertoires in the PDB and yeast. J Mol  Bioi., 
307. 929-938. 

Searls,  D.B.,  (1993)  The  computational  linguistics  of  biological 
sequences.  In  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Molecular  Biology  (L. 
Hunter ed.), AAAI  Press, The MIT Press, 47-120. 

Thieffry,  D.  and  Thomas,  R.  (1998)  Qualitative  analysis  of  gene 

networks, Pac Symp. Biocomput. 77-88. 

Tsoka,  S.  and  Ouzounis,  C.A.  (2000)  Recent developments and 
future  directions  in  computational  genomics.  FEBS  Letters, 
480,42-48. 

Uetz,  P.,  Giot,  L.,  Cagney,  G.,  Mansfield,  TA.,  Judson,  RS., 
Knight,  JR.,  Lockshon,  D.,  Narayan,  V.,  Srinivasan,  M., 
Pochart,  P.,  Qureshi-Emili  A.,  Li  Y.,  Godwin  B.,  Conover,  D., 
Kalbfleisch,  T.,  Vijayadamodar,  G.,  Yang,  M.,  Johnston,  M., 
Fields,  S.,  Rothberg,  JM.  (2000) A comprehensive analysis of 
protein-protein  interactions  in  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae. 
Nature, 403, 623-627. 

Walhout, AJ.,  Boulton.  SJ.  and Vidal,  M.  (2000) Yeast two-hybrid 
systems and protein interaction mapping projects for yeast and 
worm. Yeast, 17,88-94. 

