RAPID COMMUNICATION

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  84-86,  June  2008

In  Vivo  Target  RNA  Specificity  of  Trans-Splicing  Phenomena 
by  the  Group  I  Intron 

Min-Sun  Song  and  Seong-Wook  Lee* 

Department  of  Molecular  Biology,  Institute  of  Nanosen-
sor  and  Biotechnology,  Dankook  University,  Yongin  448- 
701,  Korea 

Abstract

The Tetrahymena  group  I  intron  has  been  shown  to  em-
ploy  a trans-splicing  reaction  and  has  been  modified  to 
specifically  target  and  replace  human  telomerase  re-
verse  transcriptase  (hTERT)  RNA  with  a  suicide  gene 
transcript,  resulting  in  the  induction  of  selective  cytotox-
icity  in  cancer  cells  that  express  the  target  RNA,  in  ani-
mal  models  as  well  as  in  cell  cultures.  In  this  study,  we 
evaluated  the  target  RNA  specificity  of  trans-splicing 
phenomena  by  the  group  I  intron  in  mice  that  were  in-
traperitoneally  inoculated  with  hTERT-expressing  human 
cancer  cells  to  validate  the  anti-cancer  therapeutic  ap-
plicability  of  the  group  I  intron.  To  this  end,  an  ad-
enoviral  vector  that  encoded  for  the  hTERT-targeting 
group  I  intron  was  constructed  and  systemically  injected 
into  the  animal.  5'-end  RACE-PCR  and  sequencing 
analyses  of  the trans-spliced  cDNA  clones  revealed  that 
all  of  the  analyzed  products  in  the  tumor  tissue  of  the 
virus-infected  mice  resulted  from  reactions  that  were 
generated  only  with  the  targeted  hTERT  RNA.  This 
study  implies  the in vivo  target  specificity  of  the trans- 
splicing  group  I  intron  and  hence  suggests  that  RNA  re-
placement  via  a  trans-splicing  reaction  by  the  group  I 
intron  is  a  potent  anti-cancer  genetic  approach.

Keywords: cancer  gene  therapy,  group  I  intron,  hTERT, 
RACE  PCR,  RNA  replacement,  trans-splicing 

The Tetrahymena  group  I  intron  has  been  shown  to  per-
form  replacement  of  a  specific  disease-causative  or 
-associated  RNA  with  a  transgene  transcript  that  exerts 
a  therapeutic  effect  through  a  trans-splicing  reaction, 
specifically  in  cells  that  express  the  target  RNA  (Drude 
et al.,  2007).  Therefore,  the trans-splicing  group  I  introns 
have  been  developed  as  gene  therapeutic  tools  to  repair 
mutant  transcripts  in  genetic  or  malignant  diseases  or  to 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  SWL0208@dankook.ac.kr
Tel  +82-31-8005-3195,  Fax  +82-31-8005-4058
Accepted  15  June  2008

reprogram  transcripts  that  are  involved  in  virus-infected 
diseases  to  induce  new  gene  activity  in  the  viral  RNA- 
expressing  cells  (Lan et al.,  1998;  Phylactou et al.,  1998; 
Rogers  et al.,  2002;  Ryu  et al.,  2003;  Kastanos  et al., 
2004;  Shin  et al.,  2004).
    Moreover,  we  recently  have  developed  a  specific 
trans-splicing  group  I  intron  that  can  target  and  replace 
human  telomerase  reverse  transcriptase  (hTERT)  RNA  to 
induce  transgene  activity  specifically  in  cancer  cells  that 
express  the  RNA  (Kwon et al.,  2005).  The  group  I  intron 
has  been  demonstrated  to  specifically  mark  tumor  cells 
that  express  hTERT  and  furthermore  to  specifically  and 
effectively  mediate  regression  of  tumor  cells  not  only in 
vitro  but  in  mice  that  have  been  xenografted  with  hu-
man  tumors  (Hong  et al.,  2008;  Jeong  et al.,  2008). 
These  data  indicate  that  the  hTERT  RNA-targeting 
trans-splicing  group  I  intron  can  be  a  potent  gene  ther-
apeutic  agent  against  human  cancer. 
    A  major  concern  in  applying  the trans-splicing  group 
I  intron  into  clinical  settings  as  a  gene  therapeutic  agent 
for  cancer  is  the in vivo  specificity  of  cancer  cell  regres-
sion.  For  such  a  specificity,  target  RNA-independent  and 
nonspecific  transgene  induction  by  the  group  I  intron 
should  be  avoided.  In  other  words,  mis-spliced  products 
should  not  be  generated  by  the  group  I  intron.  In  this 
study,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  therapeutic  feasibility  of 
the  hTERT-specific  group  I  intron,  we  assessed  the  tar-
get  RNA  specificity  of  the trans-splicing  phenomenon  by 
the  intron  in  mice  that  have  been  intraperitoneally  xeno-
grafted  with  human  cancer  cells.

Construction  of  Adenoviral  Vector  for 
hTERT-specific  Group  I  Intron 

The  expression  vector  that  encodes  for  the  hTERT-spe-
cific  trans-splicing  group  I  intron  was  constructed  as 
previously  described  (Kwon  et al.,  2005;  Song  et al., 
2006).  In  brief,  the  Rib21AS  group  I  intron,  which  recog-
nizes  uridine  at  position  21  (U21)  of  hTERT  RNA,  was 
generated  to  harbor  an  extended  internal  guide  se-
quence,  which  includes  an  internal  guide  sequence  (IGS, 
5'-GGCAGG-3'),  an  extension  of  the  P1  helix,  an  addi-
tional  6-nt-long  P10  helix,  and  a  325-nt-long  antisense 
sequence  that  is  complementary  to  the  downstream  re-
gion  (＋30  to  ＋354  residues)  of  the  targeted  U21  of 
hTERT  RNA.  In  addition,  cDNA,  as  a  3'  exon  that  enc-
odes  for  the lacZ  gene,  was  inserted  downstream  of  the 
modified  group  I  intron  expression  construct  (Fig.  1A). 

In Vivo Target  Specificity  of  Group  I  Intron    85

Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  hTERT-specific  trans-splicing  group  I  intron  and  the  adenoviral  vector  encoding  for  the 
intron.  (A)  The  target  hTERT  RNA  is  presented  with  sequences  around  the  splice  site  in  italics.  The  group  I  intron,  Rib21AS, 
is  shown  with  extended  IGS  and  3'  exon  sequences,  β-galactosidase  RNA,  capitalized.  Potential  base  parings  between 
Rib21AS  and  the  hTERT  RNA  are  represented  by  vertical  lines.  Arrows  indicate  5'  and  3'  splice  sites.  (B)  Schematic  diagram
of  recombinant  adenoviral  vector,  Ad-CMV.Ribo-LacZ,  encoding  for  the  hTERT-specific  Rib21AS  under  the  control  of  the  CMV
promoter.

The  Rib21AS  group  I  intron  has  been  observed  to  spe-
cifically  and  effectively  induce  transgene  activity  and, 
moreover,  stimulate  regression  of  hTERT＋  cancer  cells 
not  only  in in vitro  cultures  but  also  in  xenografted  mice 
that  have  been  transplanted  with  the  cells  (Kwon et al., 
2005;  Hong  et al.,  2008;  Jeong  et al.,  2008).
    The  resulting  group  I  intron  cDNA,  flanked  by  the  CMV 
promoter  and  the  3'  exon  lacZ  sequence,  was  cloned 
into  the  SpeI/BstBI  site  of  the  pAdenoVator-CMV5- 
IRES-GFP  shuttle  vector  (Qbiogene,  Irvine,  CA).  The  re-
combinant  adenoviral  vector  that  encodes  for  the  modi-
fied  intron  was  then  constructed  via  an in vivo  homolo-
gous  recombination  method  in  bacteria  (BJ5183)  as 
follows.  First,  the  modified  shuttle  vector  was  linearized 
with  PmeI  and  then  cotransformed  into  BJ5183  cells 
with  an  E1/E3-deleted  type  5  adenoviral  backbone  ge-
nome  (pAdenoVator  ΔE1/E3,  Qbiogene).  The  recombi-
nant  vector  that  was  created  through  homologous  re-
combination  in  the  BJ5183  cells  was  isolated  and  line-
arized  with PacI  and  then  transfected  into  293  cells.  The 
produced  recombinant  adenovirus  (Ad-CMV.Ribo-LacZ, 
Fig.  1B)  was  isolated  via  plaque  purification,  amplified 
using  293  cells,  purified,  and  concentrated  using 
Ⓡ
  AdenoPACKTM  100  (Sartorius  AG,  Edgewood, 
Vivapure
NY).  Titers  of  the  recombinant  adenovirus  were  de-
termined  by  TCID50  analysis.  The  construct  of  the  re-
combinant  adenoviral  vector  was  confirmed  by  PCR 
analysis  of  viral  genomic  DNA  in  hTERT＋  HT-29  cells 
that  were  infected  with  Ad-CMV.Ribo-LacZ  (data  not 
shown).  HTERT-specific  expression  of  the  transgene  by 
the  adenoviral  vector  was  proven  using  the  β-galactosi-

dase  assay  on  cell  extracts  and  RT-PCR  analysis  of  to-
tal  RNA  in  the  adenovirus-infected  cells  (data  not 
shown).

In  Vivo  Specificity  of  the  Trans-splicing 
Reaction  by  the  Group  I  Intron 

To  assess  the  in vivo  target  RNA  specificity  of  the 
hTERT-specific trans-splicing  group  I  intron,  we  first  es-
tablished  an  animal  model  of  peritoneal  carcinomatosis 
by  intraperitoneal  inoculation  of  HT-29  cells  into  male 
BALB/c  nude  mice.  The  animals  usually  showed  peri-
toneal  carcinomatosis  within  21  days  after  cell  injection. 
We  then  infected  1×109  pfu  of  Ad-CMV.Ribo-LacZ  into 
the  mice  intraperitoneally,  extracted  total  RNA  from  the 
tumors  that  were  established  in  the  mouse  2  days  after 
the  virus  treatment,  and  analyzed  the in vivo  specificity 
of  the  group  I  intron  at  the  molecular  level  by  employing 
an  RNA-tagging  approach.  In  other  words,  we  de-
termined  whether  the  intron  was  reacting  with  RNAs 
other  than  the  targeted  hTERT  RNAs  inside  adenovirus- 
infected  tumors.  To  address  the  question,  we  performed 
RT  and  a  5'-end  RACE  (rapid  amplification  of  cDNA 
ends)  PCR  reaction  of  trans-spliced  products  in  the 
hTERT-expressing  tumors  that  were  established  in  the 
animal  (Fig.  2).  Total  RNA  from  the  adenovirus-infected 
tumor  tissues  was  reverse-transcribed  with  random 
primers.  The  3'-ends  of  the  cDNA  products  were  then 
ligated  with  adaptor  oligonucleotides  (Takara,  Otsu, 
Shiga,  Japan).  The  modified  cDNAs  were  amplified  with 
10  pmol  adaptor  as  the  5'  primer  (Takara)  and  a  lacZ 

86    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  84-86,  June  2008

Fig. 2.  Specificity  of  the in vivo trans-splicing  reaction  by  a
specific  trans-splicing  group  I  intron.  A  representative  se-
quence  of  amplified  products  was  shown  from trans-spliced
RNA  in  hTERT＋  tumors  of  Ad-CMV.Ribo-LacZ  infected 
mice.  All  of  the  amplified  clones  showed  the  same  se-
quence  pattern.  The  expected  sequence,  consisting  of  the 
splicing  junction  site,  which  is  indicated  with  an  arrow,  is 
presented  with  the  intron  recognition  sequence  in  the  target 
RNA  (boxed)  and  uridine  at  position  21  (circled).

3'  primer  (5'-GGGAAGCTTCGGATTGACCGTAATGGGA). 
The  amplified  cDNAs  were  then  cloned,  and  20  different 
clones  were  sequenced.  Of  note,  the  sequence  of  the 
analyzed  splice  products  showed  that  all  of  the  prod-
ucts  resulted  from trans-splicing  reactions  only  with  the 
targeted  hTERT  RNA,  not  with  any  other  RNAs  (Fig.  2). 
In  sharp  contrast,  no  trans-spliced  products  were  pro-
duced  in  any  of  the  normal  tissues  in  the  virus-infected 
mouse  (data  not  shown).  These  results  strongly  imply 
that  the  group  I  intron  specifically  reacted  in vivo  with 
only  the  targeted  cellular  transcript,  hTERT  RNA,  and 
exerted  highly  targeted  RNA-specific  trans-splicing  ac-
tivity;  thus,  no  mis-spliced  products  were  produced  in 
the  intron-delivered  mice.  Therefore,  by  using  a  specific 
trans-splicing  group  I  intron,  the  possibility  of  non-
−
  normal  cells, 
specific  transgene  induction  in  hTERT
which  might  happen  via  off-target  effects,  can  be 
minimized. 
    Importantly,  the trans-splicing  group  I  intron  has  more 
effective  anti-cancer  features  because  it  can  reduce 
cancer-related  target  RNA  levels  and  simultaneously  in-
duce 
therapeutic  gene  expression. 
Together  with  its  efficacy,  the  in vivo  target  specificity 
of  the  group  I  intron,  which  was  confirmed  at  the  mo-
lecular  level  in  this  study,  suggests  that  cancer-specific 
RNA-targeted  gene  delivery  approaches  that  are  based 
on  RNA  replacement  will  be  very  useful  and  potent 
strategies  to  control  human  cancers.

target-specific 

Acknowledgements 

The  present  research  was  conducted  with  the  research 

fund  of  Dankook  University  in  2006. 

References 

Drude,  I.,  Dombos,  V.,  Vauleon,  S.,  and  Muller,  S.  (2007). 
Drugs  made  of  RNA:  development  and  application  of  en-
gineered  RNAs  for  gene  therapy.  Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 
7,  912-931.

Hong,  S.H.,  Jeong,  J.S.,  Lee,  Y.J.,  Jung,  H.I.,  Cho,  K.S., 
Kim,  C.M.,  Kwon,  B.S.,  Sullenger,  B.A.,  Lee,  S.W.,  and 
Kim,  I.H.  (2008).  In Vivo  reprogramming  of  hTERT  by 
trans-splicing  ribozyme  to  target  tumor  cells.  Mol. Ther. 
16,  74-80.

Jeong,  J.S.,  Lee,  S.W.,  Hong,  S.H.,  Lee,  Y.J.,  Jung,  H.I., 
Cho,  K.S.,  Seo,  H.H.,  Lee,  S.J.,  Park,  S.,  Song,  M.S., 
Kim,  C.M.,  and  Kim,  I.H.  (2008).  Antitumor  effects  of  sys-
temically  delivered  adenovirus  harboring  trans-splicing  ri-
bozyme  in  intrahepatic  colon  cancer  mouse  model.  Clin. 
Cancer Res. 14,  281-290.

Kastanos,  E.,  Hjiantoniou,  E.,  and  Phylactou,  L.A.  (2004). 
Restoration  of  protein  synthesis  in  pancreatic  cancer 
cells  by trans-splicing  ribozymes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 322,  930-934.

Kwon,  B.S.,  Jung,  H.S.,  Song,  M.S.,  Cho,  K.S.,  Kim,  S.C., 
Kimm,  K.,  Jeong,  J.S.,  Kim,  I.H.,  and  Lee,  S.W.  (2005). 
Specific  regression  of  human  cancer  cells  by  ribozyme- 
mediated  targeted  replacement  of  tumor-specific  trans-
cript.  Mol. Ther. 12,  824-834. 

Lan,  N.,  Howrey,  R.P.,  Lee,  S.W.,  Smith,  C.A.,  and  Sulleng-
er,  B.A.  (1998).  Ribozyme-mediated  repair  of  sickle  β- 
globin  mRNAs  in  erythrocyte  precursors.  Science  280, 
1593-1596.

Phylactou,  L.A.,  Darrah,  C.,  and  Wood,  M.A.J.  (1998).  Ribo-
zyme-mediated  trans-splicing  of  a  trinucleotide  repeat. 
Nat. Genet. 18,  378-381.

Rogers,  C.S.,  Vanoye,  C.G.,  Sullenger,  B.A.,  and  George, 
A.L.  (2002).  Functional  repair  of  a  mutant  chloride  chan-
nel  using  a  trans-splicing  ribozyme.  J. Clin. Invest. 110, 
1783-1798.

Ryu,  K.J.,  Kim,  J.H.,  and  Lee,  S.W.  (2003).  Ribozyme-medi-
ated  selective  induction  of  new  gene  activity  in  hepatitis 
C  virus  internal  ribosome  entry  site-expressing  cells  by 
targeted  trans-splicing.  Mol. Ther. 7,  386-395.

Shin,  K.S.,  Sullenger,  B.A.,  and  Lee,  S.W. 

(2004). 
Ribozyme-mediated 
in  human 
cancer  cells  by  targeted  repair  of  mutant  p53  RNA. Mol. 
Ther. 10,  365-372.

induction  of  apoptosis 

Song,  M.S.,  and  Lee,  S.W.  (2006).  Cancer-selective  in-
duction  of  cytotoxicity  by  tissue-specific  expression  of 
targeted  trans-splicing  ribozyme.  FEBS. Lett. 580,  5033- 
5043.

