APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(1)  54-56,  March  2008

GTVseq:  A  Web-based  Genotyping  Tool  for  Viral  Sequences 

Jae-Min  Shin1,2*,  Ho  Eun  Park1,  Yong-Ju  Ahn2, 
Doo-Ho  Cho1,  Ji  Han  Kim2,  Mee  Kyung  Kee2,3, 
Sung-Soon  Kim3,  Joo-Shil  Lee3  and  Sangsoo 
Kim2*

1SBscience  Inc.,  Seongnam,  2Department  of  Bioinfor-
matics,  Soongsil  University,  Seoul  156-743,  Korea, 
3Department  of  Immunology  and  Pathology,  National 
Institute  of  Health,  Seoul  122-701,  Korea  Centers  for 
Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  Seoul  122-701,  Korea

Abstract

Genotyping  Tool  for  Viral  SEQuences  (GTVseq)  provides 
scientists  with  the  genotype  information  on  the  viral  ge-
nome  sequences  including  HIV-1,  HIV-2,  HBV,  HCV, 
HTLV-1,  HTLV-2,  poliovirus,  enterovirus,  flavivirus,  Han-
tavirus,  and  rotavirus.  GTVseq  produces  alternative  and 
additive  genotype  information  for  the  query  viral  se-
quences  based  on  two  different,  but  related,  scoring 
methods.  The  genotype  information  produced  is  re-
ported  in  a  graphical  manner  for  the  reference  genotype 
matches  and  each  graphical  output  is  linked  to  the  de-
tailed  sequence  alignments  between  the  query  and  the 
matched  reference  sequences.  GTVseq  also  reports  the 
potential  'repeats'  and/or  'recombination'  sequence  re-
gion  in  a  separated  window.  GTVseq  does  not  replace 
completely  other  well-known  genotyping  tools  such  as 
NCBI's  virus  sequence  genotyping  tool  (http://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/projects/genotyping/formpage.cgi),  but  pro-
vides  additional  information  useful  in  the  confirmation  or 
for  further  investigation  of  the  genotype(s)  for  the  newly 
isolated  viral  sequences.

Keywords:  Genotyping,  Recombination,  Subtyping,  Viral 
Genome,  Viral  Sequence,  Virus  database,  Visualization, 
Web-Server

Introduction

Identification  of  the  genotype  (or  sub-genotype)  of  viral 
genome  sequences  or  viral  sequence  fragments  is  im-
portant  both  for  studying  epidemiology  and  for  develop-
ing  vaccines.  Recent  advances  in  genome  analysis  and 
accumulation  in  sequence  databases  enable  scientists 

*Corresponding  author:  J.M.  Shin,  E-mail  sbscience@gmail.com, 
Tel  +82-31-719-7937,  Fax  +82-31-719-7938,  S.S.  Kim,  E-mail 
sskimb@ssu.ac.kr,  Tel  +82-2-820-0457,  Fax  +82-2-824-4383
Accepted  14  March  2008

to  obtain  detailed  sequence  information  for  viral  geno-
type  through  database  searching.  For  example,  phyloge-
netic  analysis  has  been  used  to  identify  the  viral  geno-
type  of  newly  isolated  viral  sequences  by  comparing 
them  to  existing  alignments  and  trees.  There  are  several 
useful  web-based  tools  and  database  resources  for  the 
genotyping  analysis  of  the  viral  sequences,  based  on 
phylogenetic  trees  (Kuiken et al.,  2005;  de  Oliveira et al., 
2005),  sequence  similarities  of  whole  genome  and/or  lo-
cal  sequences  (Rozanov et al.,  2004;  Bao et al.,  2004; 
Tcherepanov  et al.,  2006),  or  position-specific  scoring 
matrices  (Myers et al.,  2005).  However,  accurate  deter-
mination  of  the  genotype  of  viral  sequences  based  on 
known  viral  genome  databases,  is  often  very  difficult  or 
even  impossible  because  many  newly  sequenced  viral 
sequences  are  determined  as  'new-subtype'  in  existing 
phylogeny  or  as  'recombination'  of  known  genotypes. 
    Genotyping  Tool  for  Viral  SEQuences  (GTVseq)  does 
not  determine  the  single  most  probable  genotype  of  the 
given  viral  genome  sequences,  but  rather  provides  use-
ful  suggestions  for  genotype  information.  Compared  to 
the  current  genotyping  tools,  GTVseq  has  several  unique 
and  useful  features  in  the  following  aspects:
    *  GTVseq  uses  two  different  scoring  schemes  and  the 
results  are  reported  separately.  One  of  the  scoring 
schemes  is  similar  to  that  of  NCBI,  while  the  other  is 
particularly  useful  for  viral  sequences  with  new  or  com-
plicated  genotypes  (vide infra).
    *  GTVseq  offers  an  easy  and  interactive  web-based 
user  interface,  with  intuitive  reports  for  genotyping 
results.
    *  GTVseq  can  be  used  for  genotyping  many  important 
viruses  such  as  HIV-1,  HIV-2,  HBV,  HCV,  HTLV-1, 
HTLV-2,  poliovirus,  enterovirus,  flavivirus,  Hantavirus, 
and  rotavirus,  thus  permitting  the  most  comprehensive 
genotyping  of  viral  genomes  to  date.

Methods

For  genotyping  of  viral  genome  sequences,  we  need  to 
establish  'reference  sequences'  for  each  genotype.  We 
have  downloaded  the  reference  sequence  database  col-
lections  from  NCBI  (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/ 
genotyping),  for  HIV-1,  HIV-2,  HBV,  HCV,  HTLV-1, 
HTLV-2,  and  poliovirus.  For  HIV-1  reference  sequences, 
GTVseq  also  provides  several  different  collections  of  ref-
erence  databases  such  as  HIV-1  (2004)  &  CRF,  HIV-1 
(2005),  HIV-1  (2005)  &  CRF.  For  enterovirus,  flavivirus, 
Hantavirus,  and  rotavirus,  the  reference  sequences  were 

obtained  through  personal  communications  with  the  cor-
responding  research  communities. 

these 

Based  on 

reference  sequence  databases, 
GTVseq  provides  two  different,  but  related,  scoring 
strategies  based  on  the  BLAST  (Altschul et al.,  1997)  re-
sults:  'local-identity'  and  'HSPs-bit'  scores.  In  the  lo-
cal-identity  scoring  method,  GTVseq  adopts  a  slid-
ing-sequence-window  scoring  method,  which  is  con-
ceptually  similar  to  NCBI  genotyping  methods  (Rozanov 
et al.,  2004).  But  for  a  given  sequence  window,  GTVseq 

Genotyping  Tool  for  Viral  Sequences    55

averages  the  local-identity  scores  of  the  overlapping 
windows.  Thus,  the  genotyping  output  based  on  local- 
identity-score  may  give  results  similar  to  NCBI's  geno-
typing  tool  (Rozanov et al.,  2004),  where  the  most  sim-
ilar  match  to  the  known  reference  genotype  in  every  lo-
cal  sequence  window  is  always  ranked  at  the  top  of  the 
list.  In  most  cases,  the  local-identity  score  is  adequate 
for  searching  all  the  potential  "circulating  recombinant 
forms  (CRFs)"  or  intra-  or  inter-recombinant  forms  be-
tween  two  or  more  virus  strains. 

a)

b)

c)

               

Fig.  1.  An  example  web-page  of  GTVseq  results  using  an  artificial  HIV-1  sequence  that  was  a  mosaic  composite  of  one  of
the  GenBank  sequences  (Acc.  M62320).  (a)  The  main  genotyping  output  window,  where  the  top-five  hits  for  the  local  se-
quence  window  of  the  query  are  displayed  with  different  colors.  The  genotypes  corresponding  to  the  matching  colors  are  dis-
played  on  the  right-hand  side.  The  line-graph  in  the  bottom  represents  the  'score',  where  all  the  scores  for  local  sequences
are  separated.  (b)  The  pop-up  window  for  the  summary  of  the  genotypes  for  the  query.  The  percentage  refers  to  the  geno-
type  composition  for  the  top  ranked  hit.  The  color  schemes  are  the  same  as  in  (a).  (c)  Another  pop-up  window  for  potential
'repeat'  or  'translocation'  sequence  regions,  based  on  the  sequence  alignments  between  the  query  and  each  reference 
genome.  The  detailed  'repeas'  or  'translocation'  regions  are  displayed  when  each  link  is  clicked. 

56    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(1)  54-56,  March  2008

    In  the  HSPs-bit  scoring  method,  all  HSP  (High-scoring 
Segment  Pair)  matches  between  query  and  reference 
sequences  are  collected.    All  the  HSPs  spanning  a  giv-
en  sliding  window  are  considered  and  the  subtype  of 
the  HSP  with  the  highest  bit  score  is  then  assigned  to 
the  region.  As  HSPs  are  often  much  longer  than  the 
window,  this  procedure  has  the  effect  of  considering  the 
alignment  over  wider  range  including  neighboring  win-
dows  and  consequently  being  more  robust  to  the  local 
variations  of  the  query  sequences  with  complex  re-
combinations  of  subtypes  or  divergent  from  the  re-
ferences.    In  these  cases,  those  methods  relying  on  only 
'local  identity'  only  typically  produce  unnecessarily  com-
plicated  subtype  patterns.   

Results  and  Discussion

Our  system  was  tested  with  an  artificial  sequence  that 
was  a  mosaic  composite  of  one  of  the  HIV-1  sequence 
(GenBank  Acc.  M62320).  As  shown  in  Fig.  1(a),  GTVseq 
reports  the  top  five  hits  for  each  local  sequence  window 
among  the  known  reference  genotypes.  For  a  recombi-
nant  sequences,  it  conveniently  shows  with  a  graphic 
user  interface  the  pie-chart  of  the  genotype  composition 
[Fig.  1(b)].  One  of  the  most  intriguing  features  of 
GTVseq  is  its  ability  to  detect  'repeats'  or  'translocation' 
in  the  query  sequence  [Figure  1(c)]:  A  segment  in  the 
reference  sequence  may  match  multiple  regions  of  the 
query  (repeat)  or  a  segment  in  the  query  may  be  out  of 
order  compared  to  the  reference  (translocation).  These 
'repeats'  or  'translocations'  in  retrovirus  such  as  HIV-1 
can  be  interesting  and  should  be  considered  in  the  in-
terpretation  of  the  genotyping  based  on  sequence  align-
ments.  To  our  knowledge,  no  other  genotyping/  Subtyp-
ing  tool  specifically  addresses  these  issues.  More  de-
tailed  information  on  the  scoring  can  be  obtained  from 

our  GTVseq  web-site  (http://vsd.ssu.ac.kr:8080/GTVseq/ 
Help.htm).

Acknowledgements

This  study  was  supported  by  a  grant  of  the  Korea 
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.

References

Altschul,  S.F.,  Madden,  T.L.,  Schaffer,  A.A.,  Zhang,  J., 
Miller,  W.,  and  Lipman,  D.J.  (1997).  Gapped  BLAST  and 
PSI-BLAST:  a  new  generation  of  protein  database  search 
programs.  Nucleic Acids Res.  26,  3986-3991.

Bao,  Y.,  Bolotov,  P.,  Dernovoy,  D.,  Kiryutin,  B.,  and  Tatuso-
va,  T.  (2007).  FLAN:  a  web  server  for  influenza  virus  ge-
nome  annotation.  Nucleic Acids Res.  35,  W280-284. 

de  Oliveira,  T.,  Deforche,  K.,  Cassol,  S.,  Salminen,  M., 
Paraskevis,  D.,  Seebregts,  C.,  Snoeck,  J.,  van  Rensburg, 
E.J.,  Wensing,  A.M.,  van  de  Vijver,  D.A.,  Boucher,  C.A., 
Camacho,  R.,  and  Vandamme,  A.M.  (2005).  An  auto-
mated  genotyping  system  for  analysis  of  HIV-1  and  other 
microbial  sequences.  Bioinformatics  21,  3797-3800.

Kuiken,  C.,  Yusim,  K.,  Boykin,  L.,  and  Richardson,  R. 
(2005).  The  Los  Alamos  hepatitis  C  sequence  database. 
Bioinformatics  21,  379-384.

Myers,  R.E.,  Gale,  C.V.,  Harrison,  A.,  Takeuchi,  Y.,  and 
Kellam,  P.  (2005).  A  statistical  model  for  HIV-1  sequence 
classification  using  the  subtype  analyser  (STAR). Bioinfor-
matics  21,  3535-3540.

Rozanov,  M.,  Plikat,  U.,  Chappey,  C.,  Kochergin,  A.,  and 
Tatusova,  T.  (2004).  A  web-based  genotyping  resource 
for  viral  sequences.  Nucleic Acids Res.  32,  W654-W659.
Tcherepanov,  V.,  Ehlers,  A.,  and  Upton,  C.  (2006).  Genome 
Annotation  Transfer  Utility  (GATU):  rapid  annotation  of  vi-
ral  genomes  using  a  closely  related  reference  genome. 
BMC Genomics  7,  150.

