APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  171-174,  September  2009

J2.5dPathway:  A  2.5D  Visualization  Tool  to  Display  Selected 
Nodes  in  Biological  Pathways,  in  Parallel  Planes

Sung-Il  Ham2,  Eun-Ha  Song1,  San-Duk  Yang1, 
Chin-Ting  Thong1,  Arang  Rhie1,  Bulgan  Gal-
badrakh1,  Kyung-Eun  Lee1,  Hyun-Seok  Park1* 
and  San-Ho  Lee1

1Department  of  Computer  Science,  Ewha  Womans 
University,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea,  2Department  of  Archi-
tectural  Engineering,  Yonsei  University,  Seoul  120-749, 
Korea

Abstract

The  characteristics  of  metabolic  pathways  make  them 
particularly  amenable  to  layered  graph  drawing  me-
thods.  This  paper  presents  a  visual  Java-based  tool  for 
drawing  and  annotating  biological  pathways  in  two- 
and-a-half  dimensions  (2.5D)  as  an  alternative  to  three- 
dimensional  (3D)  visualizations.  Such  visualization  allows 
user  to  display  different  groups  of  clustered  nodes,  in 
different  parallel  planes,  and  to  see  a  detailed  view  of 
a  group  of  objects  in  focus  and  its  place  in  the  context 
of  the  whole  system.  This  tool  is  an  extended  version 
of  J2dPathway.

Availability:  An  executable  demo  version  is  available  to 
download  from  Sourceforge.net  (http://sourceforge.net/ 
projects/j3dpathway/),  with  most  of  the  metabolic  path-
ways  included.  A  hands-on  tutorial  (in  Korean)  is  also 
provided.  However,  our  system  still  awaits  full  testing  of 
its  entire  functionalities  for  practical  usage.  The  current 
release  lacks  in  some  features,  however  will  constantly 
updated.  For  academic  purposes,  contact  neo@ewh-
a.ac.kr  for  source  codes,  for  possible  collaboration.

Keywords:  metabolic  pathways,  pathway  editor,  visual-
ization

Introduction

Given  the  ever-increasing  complexity  of  biological  net-
works,  automatic  graph  layout  techniques  are  becoming 
critically  important.  To  this  end,  three-dimensional  (3D) 
graph  visualization  methods  have  been  designed  and 
applied  to  the  visualization  of  large  and  complex  net-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  3  September  2009

works,  due  to  the  fact  that  certain  metabolic  pathways 
have  very  intricate  multidimensional  topology  (Rojdest-
venski,  2003;  Rzhetsky et al.,  2004;  Iragne et al.,  2005; 
Yang et al.,  2005).  The  3D  space  offers  less  constraints 
on  the  topology  and  helps  to  avoid  such  unaesthetic 
graph  elements  as  line  crossing.  The  extra  dimension 
gives  greater  flexibility  for  placing  nodes  and  edges  in 
the  network. 
    Despite  all  these  merits,  only  a  few  tools  offer 
three-dimensional  visualizations.  The  problem  is  that,  the 
resultant  3D  images  of  computer  graphics  are  rendered 
in  a  2D  media.  Therefore,  making  use  of  higher  di-
mensions  is  rather  difficult  for  users  generally  viewing 
the  network  on  a  two-dimensional  screen.
    An  alternative  approach  to  three-dimensional  graph 
visualization  would  be  to  present  only  interesting  sub-
trees  in  different  layers,  originated  from  the  basic  2D 
graph  visualization.  This  scheme  helps  when  there  is  a 
possibility  to  group  multiple  nodes  to  a  hyper-node  to 
reduce  complexity  as  well  as  to  hide  nodes  that  are  not 
of  interest. 
    This  paper  presents  a  visual  Java-based  tool  for 
drawing  and  annotating  biological  pathways  in  two- 
and-a-half-dimensions  (2.5D)  as  an  alternative  to  the  ex-
isting  two-dimensional  (2D)  or  three-dimensional  (3D) 
presentations,  where  two  and  a  half  dimension  is  an  in-
formal  term  used  to  describe  visual  phenomena  which  is 
actually  2D  with  3D  looking  graphics  (Baur et al.,  2004; 
Song et al.,  2009).  Such  visualization  allows  user  to  see 
a  detailed  view  of  an  objects  in  focus  and  its  place  in 
the  context  of  the  whole  system.

J2.5dPathway  Browser  Architecture

The  J2.5DPathway  Browser  Tool  is  a  tool  that  hierarchi-
cally  lists  the  pathways  and  super  nodes.  The  system 
provides  a  visual  interface  to  biomedical  pathways.  It  is 
basically  a  graph  visualization  tool.  An  XML-format  input 
data  may  come  from  web  services  (e.g.,  KEGG:  http:// 
www.genome.jp/kegg/soap/)  after  the  user  chooses  to 
view  the  selected  pathway  from  the  J2.5DPathway,  or  it 
may  come  from  other  file  formats,  which  were  locally 
saved. 
    J2.5DPathway  consists  of  four  major  modules:  (1) 
graphical  user  interface  (GUI),  (2)  two-dimensional  repre-
sentation,  (3)  two-and-a-half  dimensional  representation, 
and  (4)  layout  optimizer.  The  layout  optimizer  module 
permits  user  to  optimize  the  appearance  of  a  graph. 

172    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  171-174,  September  2009

Fig.  1.  SourceForge.net  is  the  world's  largest  open  source  software  development  web  site.  It  is  the  global  technology  com-
munity's  nexus  for  information  exchange,  and  open  source  software  distribution  and  services.  J2.5pathway  system  is  regis-
tered  in  http://sourceforge.net/projects/j3dpathway/. 

Fig.  2.  Overview  of  the  J2.5dPathway  Browser  Architecture:  J2.5dPathway  was  implemented  in  Java  and  the  Java  based 
graph  library  yFiles,  an  extensive  JavaTM  class  (Wiese  et al.,  2000).

Implemented  data  structures  are  based  on  an  ontology 
model  designed  specifically  for  metabolic  pathways.
    The  GUI  module  comprises  of  a  set  of  tools  for  facili-

tating  interaction  between  the  system  and  the  user  (see 
Fig.  2).  The  screen  of  J2.5dPathway  system  consists  of 
Views.  The  tool-bar  menu  at  the  top  lists  various  tool 

J2.5dPathway  Tool  to  Display  Selected  Nodes  in  Biological  Pathways    173

icons.  Most  of  the  functions  of  the  tool  icons  are 
self-explanatory.  For  example,  clicking  the  Magnifying 
Glass  tool  manipulates  the  View  to  zoom  in  or  out. 
Pathways  will  be  initially  displayed  in  the  main  window 
in  the  middle.  Below  the  main  window,  a  table  lists  all 
the  nodes  in  the  pathways.  The  interested  nodes  can  be 
selected,  by  clicking  the  elements  in  the  table.  To  allow 
user  to  view  several  different  groups  of  nodes,  selected 
nodes  will  be  displayed  in  different  parallel  planes,  how-
ever  with  interdependent  layouts.  In  the  case  user  wants 
to  create  a  new  plane,  he  or  she  may  set  the  plane 
number  to  a  value  greater  than  one.
    Alternatively,  a  feature  of  selecting  nodes  of  interest 
is  also  available  by  clicking  and  dragging  a  rectangular 
or  circular  area  on  the  2D  plane.  This  is  possible  be-
cause  J2.5dPathway 
is  an  extended  version  of 
J2dPathway  (Song et al.,  2008).    J2dPathway  has  a  fea-
ture  to  select  arbitrary  nodes  and  abstracts  them  into  a 
single  node.  One  can  select  several  nodes  by  dragging 
the  mouse  and  turn  them  into  a  single  super  node. 
These  abstracted  nodes  are  displayed  in  a  different 
plane,  in  a  consequent  process. 
    For  example,  the  selected  nodes  (the  red  nodes)  in 

Fig.  3  are  abstracted  into  a  single  super  node  (Song et 
al.,  2008)  in  J2dPathway  environment.  However,  the  se-
lected  nodes  in  the  original  2D  visualization  are  dis-
played  in  a  different  plane  in  J2.5dPathway  environment. 
The  transformed  two-and-a-half  dimensional  representa-
tion  and  the  original  two  dimensional  representations  are 
basically  consistent  with  each  other.

Implementation

Our  application  was  developed  based  on  Java  3D 
classes  and  methods,  importing  from  javax.media.j3d 
(see  Fig.  4).  It  is  implemented  based  on  Java  3D  API 
(http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/desktop/java3d/) 
and  OpenGL  (http://www.opengl.org/about/overview/)  te-
chnologies,  the  premier  environment  for  developing  port-
able,  interactive  3D  graphics  applications.  To  run  the 
J2.5dPathway  system,  the  graph  library  yFiles  should  be 
also  installed  on  user’s  local  computer  (Wiese  et al., 
2000).

Fig.  3.  Node  Abstracting  Features  of  J2dPathway  and  J2.5dPathway:  In  J2dPathway,  selected  cyclic  nodes  have  been  ab-
stracted  into  a  single  super  node.  However,  in  J2.5dPathway,  selected  nodes  will  not  be  abstracted.  Rather,  they  will  be  dis-
played  in  a  different  plane.  The  circular  area  in  this  snap-shot  is  selected  by  calling  a  subroutine  from  the  main  window  to
find  a  clique  or  cycle.

174    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  171-174,  September  2009

Fig.  4.  The  Top-level  Class  Diagram  of  pathway3D.part3D  Package  of  J2.5dPathway:  Java3D  is  a  part  of  Java  Media 
Framework  APIs,  which  is  a  standard  extension  of  Java.

Conclusion

Layouts  in  3D  space  may  be  able  to  create  a  more  ef-
fective  workspace  for  the  study  of  large-scale  metabolic 
pathways.  Despite  all  the  merits  of  3D  visualization, 
making  use  of  higher  dimensions  is  difficult  because 
users  are  generally  viewing  the  3D  visualization  object 
on  a  two-dimensional  screen.  Consequently,  dynamic 
navigation  is  a  necessity  in  3D  scheme.  Nevertheless, 
these  approaches  would  not  be  useful,  without  speci-
alized  haptic  devices  (Yang et al.,  2005).  A  visualization 
tool,  such  as  J2.5dPathway,  based  on  two-and-a-half 
dimensions  (2.5D),  is  a  compromise,  as  an  alternative  to 
the  existing  two-dimensional  (2D)  or  three-dimensional 
(3D)  visualizations.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  a  grant  from 
SMBA  (Small  &  Medium  Business  Administration),  and 
the  Brain  Korea  21  project.

References
Baur,  M.,  Brandes,  U.,  Gaertler,  M.,  and  Wagner,  D.  (2004). 
Drawing  the  as  graph  in  2.5  dimensions,  proceeding  of 

graph  drawing. Lecture Notes in Computer Science  3383, 
43-48.

Song,  E.H.,  Ham,  S.I.,  Yang,  S.D.,  Rhie,  A.,  Park,  H.S.,  and 
Lee,  S.H.  (2008).  J2dPathway:  A  global  metabolic  path-
way  viewer  with  node  abstracting  features.  Genomics 
Inform.  6,  68-71.

Song,  E.H.  (2009).  2.5D  metabolic  pathway  drawing  mod-

ules  based  on  2-layered  layout  (in  Korean).  Journal of 
KIISE: Computer Systems and Theory (to be submitted).
Iragne,  F.,  Nikolski,  M.,  Mathieu.  B.,  Auber,  D.,  and 
Sherman,  D.  (2005).  ProViz:  protein  interaction  visual-
ization  and  exploration.  Bioinform.  21,  272-274.

Rojdestvenski,  I.  (2003).  VRML  metabolic  network  visualizer. 

Comp. Bio. Med.  33,  169-182.

Rzhetsky,  A.,  Iossifov,  I.,  Koike,  T.,  Krauthammer,  M.,  Kra, 
P.,  Morris,  M.,  Yu,  H.,  Duboue,  P.A.,  Weing,  W.,  Wilbur, 
W.J.,  Hatzivassiloglou,  V.,  and  Friedman,  C. 
(2004). 
GeneWays:  a  system  for  extracting,  analyzing,  visualizing, 
and  integrating  molecular  pathway  data.  J.  Biomed. 
Informat.  37,  43-53.

Yang,  Y.,  Engin,  L.,  Wurtele,  E.S.,  Cruz-Neira,  C.,  and 
Dickerson,  J.A.  (2005).  Integration  of  metabolic  networks 
and  gene  expression  in  virtual  reality.  Bioinform.  21, 
3645-3650.

Wiese,  R.,  Iglsperger,  M.,  and  Schabert,  P.  (2000).  The 
yFiles  graph  library:  documentation  and  code.  http:// 
www-pr.informatik.uni-tuebingen.de/yfiles.

