Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(1)  44-49,  March  2008

Sequence  Analysis  and  Potential  Action  of  Eukaryotic  Type 
Protein  Kinase  from  Streptomyces  coelicolor  A3(2)

Daisy  R.  Roy  and  Sathees  B.C.Chandra* 

Department  of  Biological,  Chemical  and  Physical  Scien-
ces,  Roosevelt  University,  Chicago  IL-60605  USA

Abstract

Protein  kinase  C  (PKC)  is  a  family  of  kinases  involved 
in  the  transduction  of  cellular  signals  that  promote  lipid 
hydrolysis.  PKC  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  mediating  cellular 
responses  to  extracellular  stimuli  involved  in  prolifer-
ation,  differentiation  and  apoptosis.  Comparative  analy-
sis  of  the  PKC-α,β,ε  isozymes  of  200  recently  se-
quenced  microbial  genomes  was  carried  out  using  varie-
ty  of  bioinformatics  tools.  Diversity  and  evolution  of  PKC 
was  determined  by  sequence  alignment.  The  ser/thr 
protein  kinases  of Streptomyces coelicolor A3 (2),  is  the 
only  bacteria  to  show  sequence  alignment  score  greater 
than  30%  with  all  the  three  PKC  isotypes  in  the  se-
quence  alignment. S.coelicolor  is  the  subject  of  our  in-
terest  because  it  is  notable  for  the  production  of  phar-
maceutically  useful  compounds 
including  anti-tumor 
agents,  immunosupressants  and  over  two-thirds  of  all 
natural  antibiotics  currently  available.  The  comparative 
analysis  of  three  human  isotypes  of  PKC  and  Serine/ 
threonine  protein  kinase  of S.coelicolor  was  carried  out 
and  possible  mechanism  of  action  of  PKC  was  derived. 
Our  analysis  indicates  that  Serine/  threonine  protein  kin-
ase  from S. coelicolor  can  be  a  good  candidate  for  po-
tent  anti-tumor  agent.  The  presence  of  three  representa-
tive  isotypes  of  the  PKC  super  family  in  this  organism 
helps  us  to  understand  the  mechanism  of  PKC  from 
evolutionary  perspective. 

Keywords:    eukaryotic  type  protein,  evolution,  protein 
kinase  C,  Streptomyces coelicolor

Introduction

Protein  kinase  C  (PKC)  a  family  of  kinases,  involved  in 
the  transduction  of  signals  for  cell  proliferation  and  dif-
ferentiation,  is  an  80KDa  enzyme  that  transduces  the 
cellular  signals  to  promote  lipid  hydrolysis  (Nishizuka, 
1995).  This  is  recruited  to  the  plasma  membrane  by  the 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  schandra@roosevelt.edu
Tel  +847-619-7968,  Fax  +847-619-8555
Accepted  6  March  2008

implicated 

second  messenger  diacylglycerol.  PKC  phosphorylates 
tyrosine  residues  in  certain  target  proteins,  which  control 
growth  and  cellular  differentiation  (Filner,  1999).  PKC 
plays  a  pivotal  role  in  mediating  cellular  responses  to 
extracellular  stimuli  involved  in  proliferation,  differentia-
tion,  apoptosis,  and  exocytotic  release  in  a  number  of 
non-neuronal  systems  such  as  islet  cells,  chromaffin 
cells  and  paramecium  (Ohkusu et al,  1995).  PKC  has  al-
so  been 
in  neoplastic  transformation  & 
carcinogenesis.  Tumor  cell  invasion  renders  it  a  poten-
tially  suitable  target  for  anticancer  therapy  (Yoshiji et al, 
1999).
    PKC  isozymes  contain  four  conserved  regions  termed 
C1-C4.  C1  contains  a  cysteine-rich  motif  and  forms  the 
diacylglycerol-binding  site  (Newton,  1995).  The  auto  in-
hibitory  pseudosubstrate  sequence  is  upstream  of  the 
cysteine-rich  motif  in  the  same  region  (House  et al, 
1987).  C2  contains  the  recognition  site  for  acidic  lipids 
and,  in  some  isozymes,  the  Ca2+  binding  site.  C3  and 
C4  form  the  ATP  and  substrate  binding  lobes  of  the  kin-
ase,  respectively  (Newton,  1995).  In  the  inactive  form, 
the  pseudosubstrate  domain  is  bound  to  the  catalytic 
domain  of  PKC  (Orr et al,  1994).  Upon  stimulation,  PKC 
translocates  to  the  plasma  membrane  where  the  C1  and 
C2  domains  interact  with  DAG  and  phosphatidylserine, 
respectively.  This  interaction  causes  the  pseudosub-
strate  domain  to  dissociate  from  the  catalytic  domain, 
which  results  in  activation  of  PKC.  Inactive  PKC  is  not 
freely  distributed  throughout  the  cytoplasm  but  appears 
to  be  localized  to  specific  sites  within  the  cell.  Associa-
tion  of  PKC  with  scaffolding  proteins  such  as  AKAP79 
(A  Kinase-Anchoring  Protein  79)  (Klauck et al,  1996)  and 
Gravin  (Nauert  et al,  1996)  facilitates  localization.
   Streptomycetes  are  ubiquitous  soil  bacteria,  and  they 
play  a  key  role  in  the  global  carbon  cycle  by  degrading 
the  insoluble  remains  of  other  organisms.  More  clues  to 
the  development  of  the  PKC  super  family  come  from  the 
study  of  the  bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor. S. coe-
licolor  has  a  large  collection  of  enzymes  and  can  me-
tabolize  many  diverse  nutrients.  This  extremely  simple 
organism  contains  approximately  8,667,507bp,  yet  has 
complex  life  cycle  exhibiting  mycelial  growth  and  spore 
formation  (Bentley,  2002)  and  notable  for  production  of 
pharmaceutically  useful  anti-tumor  compounds.  Of  the 
predicted  genes,  an  unprecedented  proportion  carries 
out  regulatory  functions  in  the  cell  (Winstead,  2002). 
More  than  twelve  percent  of  the  genome  is  involved  in 
facilitating  biological  processes,  such  as  the  bacterium's 

Eukaryotic-type  Protein  Kinase  from  Streptomyces coelicolor  A3(2)      45

response  to  environmental  stimuli  and  stress.  The  chro-
mosome  of S coelicolor  is  long  with  a  G+C  content  of 
72.1%  and  is  predicted  to  contain  7825  protein  encod-
ing  genes.  Analysis  of  these  sequences  predicts  the 
presence  of  3  PKC-related  proteins,  alpha,  beta  and  ep-
silon  in  this  organism. S. coelicolor  A3  (2)  is  apparently 
being  used  an  extremely  manipulatable  and  powerful 
genetic  system  (Bentley  et al,  2002).  The  presence  of 
three  representative  isotypes  of  the  PKC  super  family  in 
this  organism  helps  us  to  understand  the  mechanism  of 
PKC  from  evolutionary  perspective. 
    The  major  aim  of  our  present  work  is  to  understand 
the  role  of  PKC  family  in  general  and  to  use  the  protein 
kinase  family  as  a  model  to  look  at  sequence  evolution 
in  higher  organisms.  200  medically  significant  bacterial 
genomes  were  selected  and  studied  from  the  list  of  re-
cently  sequenced  organisms.  In  this  article,  we  deter-
mine  and  analyze  the  sequence  homology  of  microbial 
genomes  with  that  of  human  PKC's  using  various  bio-
informatics  tools.  Furthermore,  the  evolution  of  action  of 
mechanism  of  PKC  is  discussed  from  the  evolutionary 
perspective.

Method
Comparative  analysis  of  the  PKC-α,β,ε isozymes  of 
200  recently  sequenced  microbial  genomes,  that  were 
found  in  ergo  integrated  genomics  (http://ergo.inte-
gratedgenomics.com/ERGO)  and  NCBI 
(http://www. 
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)  websites,  was  carried  out  using  variety 
of  bioinformatics  tools.  Protein  sequences  of  the  three 
human  isotypes  of  PKC  and  Serine/threonine  protein 

kinase  of  S.coelicolor  were  obtained  in  fasta  format 
from  pfam-wellcome  trust  Sanger's  institute.  These  two 
sequences  were  blasted  at  the  same  time  using  NCBI- 
blast2seq  to  obtain  the  percent  identity  and  the  align-
ment  of  sequences.  The  domain  structure  was  obtained 
from  pfam-graphical  view  of  the  domain  structure  for 
sequence  comparison.  Multiple  sequence  alignment  of 
all  the  four  sequences  (PKC-α,β,ε &  serine/  threonine 
protein  kinase  from  microbe)  was  done  using  EMBL-EBI 
ClustalW  and  the  conserved  consensus  sequences  were 
obtained  using  the  jal  view.

Results
Comparative  analysis  of  the  α,β,ε isotypes  of  PKC 
with  200  completely  sequenced  genomes  resulted  in  on-
ly  two  genomes  with  significant  sequence  similarity 
score  in  all  the  three  isotypes.  The  ser/thr  protein  kin-
ases  of  S.coelicolor A3 (2),  Enterococcus faecium DO 
(JGI)  are  the  only  bacteria  to  show  sequence  alignment 
score  greater  than  30%  ,with  all  the  three  PKC  isotypes, 
in  the  protein  sequence  alignment  (Fig.  1).  S.coelicolor 
is  the  subject  of  our  interest  in  this  study,  because  of 
its  association  with  production  of  pharmaceutically  use-
ful  anti-tumor  drugs.  After  the  sequencing  of  the  ge-
nome  in  2002,  it  is  now  clear  that  serine/threonine  kin-
ase  represents  the  sole  PKC  in S.coelicolor.  The  protein 
kinase  of  the  bacterium  shows  high  homology  with  the 
PKCs,  and  its  domain  structure  suggests  similar  enzy-
matic  properties.  It  has  a  Gln/Pro  rich  domain  that  con-
tains  the  invariant  residues  required  to  confer  calcium 
binding  as  the  C-2  domain  of  the  PKC's  and  also  a 

PKC epsilon

Isotype  of  PKC

C1-1

C1-1

C-2

PKC  core

1

2

3
4

5

6

Beta  &  Epsilon

Alpha  &  Epsilon

Alpha  &  Beta
Serine/threonine  protein  kinase  from  Streptomyces 
 coelicolor (8-276  residues)  &  Alpha
Serine/threonine  protein  kinase  from  Streptomyces 
 coelicolor (8-276  residues)  &  Beta
Serine/threonine  protein  kinase  from  Streptomyces 
 coelicolor (8-276  residues)  &  Epsilon

65

65

92

−
−
−

63

61

77

−
−
−

No 

similarity

No 

similarity

71

−
−
−

66

66

83
33

32

28

Fig.  1.  Protein  domain  architecture  of  PKC:-

PKC 
terminal

46

47

80

−
−
−

Low 

complexity 

Region

No 

similarity

No 

similarity

−
−
−
−

46    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(1)  44-49,  March  2008

well-conserved  PKC  domain.
    It  is  evident  from  our  analysis  (Fig.  2)  that  the  se-
quence  of  ser/thr  protein  kinase  is  highly  conserved  in 
the  regions  from  54∼57  and  137∼141.  This  highly  con-
served  region  corresponds  to  regions  around  100  for 
PKC  α & β and  240  region  for  PKC-ε  that  further  fall 
in  the  C1  domain  of  PKC.  This  is  the  region  where  pro-
teins  bind  to  DAG/  PE  and  bring  down  the  activation  of 
the  enzyme.  This  structural  similarity  facilitates  the  bind-
ing  of  ser/  threonine  protein  kinase  of S.coelicolor  to  the 
DAG/PE  binding  site,  there  by  likely  inhibits  the  binding 
of  PKC  to  the  activation  receptors-  C-1  domain.  The 
PKC  core  domain  in  the  activated  state  doesn't  have  a 

binding  site  to  bind  and  under  goes  proteolysis-causing 
inhibition  of  the  entire  down  stream  pathway.  This  hap-
pens  due  to  competitive  binding  of  ser/thr  kinase  result-
ing  in  inhibition  of  PKC.  Thus  the  microbe's  protein  kin-
ase  is  more  than  likely  to  function  as  anti-tumor  drug. 
The  protein  kinase  of  bacterium  is  presumed  to  act  by 
competing  at  PKCs  conserved  C-1  domain  thereby  in-
hibiting  the  enzyme  activity  irreversibly.  Conserved  se-
quences  are  the  regions  of  having  high  catalytic  activity 
and  normally  function  as  active  sites. 
    Due  to  the  structural  similarity  of  S.coelicolor  kinase 
with  PKC,  its  kinase  competitively  inhibits  the  binding  of 
PKC  to  the  phorbol-ester  domain  thus  inhibiting  the  for-

Fig.  2.  Sequence  conservation  in  the  ser/thr  protein  kinase  motif  of  S.coelicolor.

Eukaryotic-type  Protein  Kinase  from  Streptomyces coelicolor  A3(2)      47

mation  of  tumors.  This  function  enlists  the  microbe  as 
an  anti-tumor  agent.  The  current  knowledge  of  the  PKC 
signaling  pathway  (activation  of  conventional  PKC)  as 
well  the  activations  that  are  indicated  from  our  analysis, 
in  humans  in  tumor  formation,  is  shown  in  Fig.  3A,  B. 
External  stimulus  activates  a  G-Protein-Coupled  Recep-
tor  (GPCR),  which  in  turn  activates  a  stimulating  G- 
protein.  The  G-protein  activates  phospholipase  C  (PLC), 

which  cleaves  phosphoinositol-4,  5-bisphosphate  (PIP2) 
into  1,2-diacylglycerol  and  inositol-1,  4,5-trisphosphate 
(IP3).  The  IP3  interacts  with  a  calcium  channel  in  the 
endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER),  releasing  Ca2+  into  the 
cytoplasm.  The  increase  in  Ca2+  levels  activates  PKC, 
which  translocates  to  the  membrane,  anchoring  to  diac-
ylglycerol  (DAG)  and  phosphatidylserine.  The  active  PKC 
transduces  down  stream  signals  activating  many  pro-

A

B

Fig. 3.  (A)  PKC  activation  and  mechanism  of  signaling  in  the  presence  of  ser/thr  protein  kinase.  (B)  PKC  activation  and  mech-
anism  of  signaling  in  the  absence  of  ser/thr  protein  kinase.

48    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(1)  44-49,  March  2008

teins  ultimately  leading  to  the  formation  of  tumors  by 
activation  of  angiogenesis  promoting  protein.

Discussion

Although  the  structure  of  PKC  is  not  known,  we  know 
for  sometime  that  the  isozymes  of  PKC  are  homologous 
with  cAMP-dependent  protein  kinase  (protein  kinase  A) 
(Mellor et al,  1998).  The  consensus  sequence  of  protein 
kinase  C  enzymes  is  similar  to  that  of  protein  kinase  A, 
because  it  contains  basic  amino  acids  close  to  the 
Ser/Thr  to  be  phosphorylated.  PKC  is  distributed  ubiq-
uitously  in  variety  of  organisms.  Biochemical,  molecular 
cloning,  and  immuno-cytochemical  analysis  has  revealed 
the  existence  of  multiple  subspecies  of  PKC  in  various 
mammalian  tissues  as  well  as  in  other  organisms  such 
as  Xenopus laevis  (Chen  et al,  1989),  Dictyostelium 
(Luderus  et al,  1989;  Jimenez  et al,  1989),  Sea  urchin 
eggs  (Shen et al,  1989),  and Drosophila  (Rosenthal et al, 
1987;  Schaeffer et al,  1989).    An  enzyme  similar  to  PKC 
has  been  identified  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  (Ogita 
et al,  1990)  and  a  gene  that  encodes  a  nucleotide  se-
quence  with  50%  identity  to  the  sequence  of  the  mam-
malian  PKC  is  also  been  isolated.  PKC  is  not  a  single 
enzyme  but  a  family  of  kinases  with  at  least  10  isoforms 
that  are  synthesized  as  single  polypeptides  with  N-ter-
minal  regulatory  domain  (20∼40kDa)  and  a  C-terminal 
catalytic  domain  (∼45kDa). 
    Examination  of  S.coelicolor  protein  sequence  shows 
that  the  domain  sequence  8-276  exhibits  protein  kinase 
activity  and  has  ＞28%  identity  with  the  core  protein 
kinase  C  activity  of  all  the  isotypes  of  PKC  (Fig.  1).  In 
the  mammalian  PKC  super  family,  the  various  regulatory 
modules  are  differentially  distributed  between  the  differ-
ent  isotypes.  However  all  of  these  elements  are  present 
together  in  S.coelicolor,  suggesting  that  this  serine/ 
threonine  protein  kinase  represents  an  archetypal  PKC. 
The  structural  similarity  of  ∼30%  between  PKC  iso-
types  and S.coelicolor protein  kinase  and  the  conserved 
sequences  provides  insight  about  the  development  of 
inhibitors  of  protein  kinase  C  from  S.coelicolor. Protein 
kinase  C  catalyzes  the  phosphorylation  of  tyrosine  resi-
dues  in  certain  proteins.  A  protein  which  stimulates  an-
giogenesis,  e.g.  of  solid  tumors,  called  Vascular  Endo-
thelial  Growth  Factor  (VEGF),  depends  in  part  on  activa-
tion  of  a  protein  which  is  a  receptor  for  VEGF.  The  acti-
vation  is  achieved  by  phosphorylation  of  the  VEGF  re-
ceptor,  which  in  turn  is  catalyzed  by  a  protein  kinase  C. 
Drugs  which  inhibit  protein  kinase  C  can  promote  death 
of  tumor  cells.  Drug  companies  have  been  developing 
inhibitors  of  protein  kinase  C,  for  quite  sometime  now, 
because  a  number  of  processes  important  in  certain 
diseases,  notably  solid  tumors,  are  facilitated  by  the  ac-

tion  of  protein  kinase  C.  Applications  of  the  microbe  as 
anti-tumor  drug  due  to  the  structural  similarity  of  the  mi-
crobes  protein  kinase  with  C-1  domain  is  inevitable  in 
this  case.  During  the  activation  of  PKC  in  the  signaling 
pathway  serine/threonine  protein  kinase  from  S. coeli-
color  competitively  binds  to  the  Diacyl  glycerol/Phorbol 
ester-binding  domain  inhibiting  the  binding  of  active 
PKC.  This  will  in  turn  devoid  the  PKC  enzyme  of  its 
substrate  further  inhibiting  all  the  down  stream  path-
ways  activated  by  PKC.  Thus  serine/  threonine  protein 
kinase  acts  as  anti-tumor  agent.  The  current  PKC  in-
hibitor 
relatively 
non-specific  in  its  action;  i.e  does  not  fully  exploit  the 
potential  for  differential  inhibition  of  PKC  functions  or 
specific  isoenzymes.  The  role  of  PKC  in  tumor  formation 
and  apoptosis  suggests  that  combination  of  PKC  in-
hibitors  with  conventional  cytotoxics  may  be  effective 
for  complete  treatment.  The S.coelicolor  sequence  pro-
vides  a  new  drive  and  dimensions  for  researchers  trying 
to  develop  pharmaceuticals  through  the  genetic  en-
gineering  of  bacteria.

that  has  been 

reviewed  here 

is 

Future  Perspectives

The  function  of  serine/threonine  protein  kinase  in  S. 
coelicolor  is  not  yet  known.  Our  analysis  gives  new  di-
rections  to  the  researcher  in  this  field  of  anti-tumor 
drugs.  Eventually,  the  clues  to  its  function  may  come 
from  its  localization  &  structure.  The  structure  of  PKC 
provides  a  starting  point  for  the  drug  design  of  high  po-
tency  inhibitors  of  the  catalytic  activity  of  PKC.  Catalytic 
key  residues  (Lys-137,  and  Asp-141of  S.coelicolor  kin-
ase),  invariant  in  all  protein  kinases,  preserve  intra-
molecular  interactions  observed  in  active  kinase  struc-
tures,  in  accordance  with  the  structural  criteria  used  to 
define  catalytically  active  kinase  conformations.  Our  fu-
ture  work  may  focus  on  predicting  consensus  secondary 
structure  for  the S.coelicolor  kinase  from  a  combination 
of  the  multiple  sequence  alignments,  probabilities  for 
formation  of  loop,  a-helix,  and  b  sheet  regions  and  an 
average  hydropathy  plot.  Studies  on  the  endogenous 
protein  by  Immuno  techniques  may  bring  light  on  the 
distribution  of  this  protein  kinase  in  the  bacterium  and 
this  knowledge  can  eventually  be  utilized  to  understand 
the  functionality  of  this  protein.  It  may  be  possible  to 
develop  agents  that  target  a  single  isoenzyme  in  the 
near  future.  Furthermore,  as  the  downstream  events  re-
sulting  from  PKC  activation  are  being  characterized  it 
may  be  appropriate  to  target  events  further  down  the 
signaling  pathways  rather  than  concentrating  on  events 
happening  in  the  activation  process.  Further  research  is 
needed  to  establish  if  inhibition  of  PKC  isoenzymes  by 
S.coelicolor  protein  kinase  will  prove  beneficial  in  con-

Eukaryotic-type  Protein  Kinase  from  Streptomyces coelicolor  A3(2)      49

trolling  and  terminating  tumors.

References

Bentley,  S.D.,  Charter,  K.F.,  Cerdeno  Tarraga,  A.M.,  Challis, 
G.L.,  Thomson,  N.R.,  James,  K.D.,  Harris,  D.E.,  Quail, 
M.A.,  Kieser,  H.,  Harper,  D.,  Batemen,  A.,  Brown,  S., 
Chandra,  G.,  Chen,  C.W.,  Collins,  M.,  Cronin,  A.,  Fraser, 
A.,  Globle,  A.,  Hidalgo,  J.,  Hornsby,  T.,  Howartg,  S., 
Huang,  C.H.,  Kieser,  T.,  Larke,  L.,  Murphy,  L.,  Oliver,  K., 
O'Neil,  S.,  Rabbinowitsch,  E.,  Rajandream,  M.A., 
Rutherford,  K.,  Rutter,  S.,  Seeger,  K.,  Saunders,  D., 
Sharp,  S.,  Squares,  S.,  Taylor,  K.,  Warren,  T.,  Wietzorrek, 
A.,  Woodward,  J.,  Barrell,  B.  G.,  Parkhill,  J.,  and 
Hopwood,  D.A.  (2002).    Complete  genome  sequence  of 
the  model  actinomycete  Streptomyces coelicolor  A3(2). 
Nature  417,  141-147.

Chen,  K.H.,  Peng,  Z.G.,  Lavu,  S.,  and  Kung,  H.F.  (1989). 
Molecular  cloning  and  sequence  analysis  of  two  distinct 
types  of  Xenopus laevis  protein  kinase  C.  Second  mes-
sengers  Phosphoproteins  12,  251-260.

Filner,  P.  (1999).  Protein  kinase  C:  possibly  a  drug  target 
for  inhibiting  neovascularization  in  wet  age-related  mac-
ular  degeneration.  MD  Foundation  Inc,  Macular Degene-
ration Research Fund.  October  31.

House,  C.,  and  Kemp,  B.E.  (1987).  Protein  kinase  C  con-
regulatory 

tains  a  pseudosubstrate  prototype 
domain.  Science  238,  1726-1728.

in 

its 

Jimenez,  B.,  Pestana,  A.,  and  Fernandez-Renart,  M.  (1989). 
A  phospholipid-stimulated  protein  kinase  from  Dictyoste-
lium discoideum. Biochem.  J.  260,  557-561.

Luderus,  M.E.E.,  Van  der  Most,  R.G.,  Otte,  A.P.,  and  Driel, 
R.V.  (1989).  A  protein  kinase  C  related  enzyme  activity  in 
Dictyostelium discoideum. FEBS Lett.  253,  71-75.

Mellor,  H.  and  Parker,  J.P.  (1998).  Review:  the  extended 
protein  kinase  C  super  family. Biochem. J.  332,  281-292. 
Newton,  A.C.  (1995).  Protein  kinase  C:  structure,  function 

and  regulation.  J. Biol. Chem.  270,  48,  28495-28498.

Nishizuka,  Y.  (1995).  Protein  kinase  C  and  lipid  signaling  for 

sustained  cellular  responses. FASEB J.  9(7),  484-496.

  Ogita,  K.,  Miyamoto,  S.,  Koide,  H.,  Iwai,  T.,  Oka,  M., 
Ando,  K.,  Kishimoto,  A.,  Ikeda,  K.,  Fukami,  Y.,  and 
Nishizuka,  Y.  (1990).    Protein  kinase  C  in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae:  comparison  with  the  mammalian  enzyme. 
PNAS.    87,  5011-5015.

Orr,  J.W.,  and  Newton,  A.C.  (1994).  Intrapeptide  regulation 
of  protein  kinase  C. J. Biol. Chem.  269(11),  8383-  8387.
Schaeffer,  E.,  Smith,  D.,  Mardon,  G.,  Quinn,  W.,  and  Zuker, 
C.  (1989).  Isolation  and  characterization  of  two  new  dro-
sophila  protein  kinase  C  genes,  including  one  specifically 
expressed  in  photoreceptor  cells.  Cell  57,  403-412.

Shen,  S.S.,  and  Ricke,  L.A.  (1989).  Protein  Kinase  C  from 
sea  urchin  eggs.  Comp  Biochem.  Physiol.  B.  92, 
251-254.

Winstead,  E.R.  (2002).  Medicinal  microbe  Streptomyces 
coelicolor  is  sequenced. Genome News Network.  May  9. 
Yoshiji,  H.,  Kuriyama,  S.,  Ways,  D.K.,  Yoshii,  J.,  Miyamoto, 
Y.,  Kawata,  M.,  Ikenaka,    Y.,  Tsujinoue,  H.,  Nakatani,  T., 
Shibuya,  M.,  and  Fukui,  H.  (1999).  Protein  kinase  C  lies 
on  the  signaling  pathway  for  vascular  endothelial  growth 
factor-mediated  tumor  development  and  angiogenesis. 
Cancer Res.  59,  4413-4418.

