Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 2(3)  121-125, September 2004 

Application of Decision Tree for the Classification of 
Antimicrobial Peptide 

Su Yeon  Lee1•2·t, Sunkyu Kim2·t,  Sukwon S.  Kim2, 
Seon Jeong Cha1·2, Young Keun Kwon3, 
Byung-Ro Moon1·3·*  and Byeong Jae Lee1,2* 

11nterdisciplinary  Program  in  Bioinformatics,  2Laboratory 
of  Molecular  Genetics,  School  of  Biological  Sciences, 
Institute  of  Molecular  Biology  and  Genetics,  and 
30ptimization  Laboratory,  School  of  Computer  Science 
and  Engineering,  Seoul  National  University,  Seoul 
151-742,  Korea 

Abstract 
The purpose of this study was to  investigate the use of 
decision  tree  for  the  classification  of  antimicrobial 
peptides. The classification was based on the activities 
of  known  antimicrobial  peptides  against  common 
microbes including Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus.  A feature  selection  was  employed to select an 
effective subset of features from available attribute sets. 
Sequential  applications  of  decision  tree  with  17  nodes 
with  9 leaves and 13 nodes with  7 leaves  provided the 
classification rates of 76.74% and 74.66% against E.  coli 
and S. aureus, respectively. Angle subtended by positively 
charged  face  and  the  positive  charge  commonly  gave 
higher accuracies in both E.  coli and S. aureusdatasets. In 
this study, we describe a successful application of decision 
tree  that  provides  the  understanding  of  the  effects  of 
physicochemical  characteristics  of  peptides  on  bacterial 
membrane. 

Keywords:  decision tree, classification, antimicrobial peptides 

Introduction 
During  the  last  two  decades,  a  number  of  studies  on 
bactericidal  peptides  have  been  carried  out  for  the 
purpose  of  industrial,  pharmaceutical  and  medical  use 
with  great interest  (Park  eta/.,  1994;  Kim  eta/., 2003; 
Zasloff  et  a/.,  2002).  Naturally  occurring  antimicrobial 
peptides and a set of artificial peptides have been used 

*Corresponding author: E-mail imbglmg@plaza.snu.ac.kr(B. J.  L.) 
moon@soar.snu.ac.kr (8-R.  M.), 
Tel  +82-2-880-6775,  Fax +82-2-872-9019 
Accepted  19 July 2004 
trhese authors contributed  equally to this work. 

as  templates  for  generating  synthetic  peptides  with 
substitutions and deletions of amino acids to analyze the 
interaction  relationship  between  bacterial  membrane 
and the physicochemical properties of peptides such as 
hydrophobicity,  hydrophobic  moment  and  net  charge 
(Dathe eta/., 2001; Hong eta/., 2001; Dathe eta/., 2002; 
Dathe  et  a/.,  1997).  However,  as  demonstrated  by 
numerous studies on structure-activity relationship (SAR), 
a  precise  interpretation  of  differences  in  the  activity  of 
antimicrobial  peptides  is  often  difficult  due  to  the 
existence of complex interaction  between  the  peptides 
and bacterial membrane (Rocca eta/., 1999a; Rocca et 
a/.,  1999b). 

A  decision  tree  is  a  kind  of  supervised  machine 
learning  method that is often appropriate for describing 
complex  nonlinear  relationships  between  quantitative 
features  and  some  a  priori  classification 
(both 
quantitative and  qualitative)  (Mitchell  eta/.,  1997).  One 
advantage  of  the  decision  tree  approach  is  that  the 
decision  rules  can  be  displayed  in  easy-to-interpret 
graphical  manner.  Unlike  many other machine-learning 
methods that rely on abstract interpretation of the feature 
space  (Vapnik  et  a/.,  1995),  the  decision  tree  gives 
sequential  decision  splits  (nodes of the  tree)  based on 
some  marginal  feature  sets,  which  in  turn  can  be 
interpreted in terms of the biological or chemical process; 
in our case, in terms of peptide properties. 

Materials and methods 
Dataset 
A total of 402 peptides were collected from the literature 
of antimicrobial peptides to form a data set. It consists of 
natural  antibiotic peptides and  their analogs generated 
by changing physicochemical  parameters of the natural 
antibiotic peptides. These peptides were divided into two 
groups  according  to  their  reported  minimal  inhibitory 
concentration  (MIC)  values that  present the strength of 
antimicrobial activities in molar concentrations. Peptides 
with  MIG  values  of  1 0  pM  or  below  were  grouped  as 
strong  peptides 
terms  of  antimicrobial  activity, 
whereas  those  with  MIG  values  above  40  pM  were 
grouped  as  weak  antimicrobial  peptides.  Among  the 
peptide,  we  used  133 antimicrobial  peptides which  had 
MIG values above 40 or below 10 pM against E.  coli. We 
excluded data between 10 pM and 40 pM , because it is 

in 

122  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  2(3)  121-125, September 2004 

difficult to determine strong or weak.  In  the same way, 
we included 102 antimicrobial peptides with MIG values 
against S.  aureus. 

The data set  of  E.  coli consists  of 7 4  peptides with 
strong antimicrobial  activity and 59 peptides with  weak 
antimicrobial  activity.  In case of S.  aureus,  41  peptides 
were strong and the rest were weak with respect to their 
antimicrobial activities. 

Decision trees 
Decision trees have been applied to various studies for 
biological  data  mining,  such  as  protein  secondary 
structure prediction (Selbig eta!., 2002), gene prediction 
in vertebrate DNA sequences (Salzberg eta/., 1998) and 
small  molecule solubility prediction (Xia eta!., 2003).  A 
classification  and  prediction  of  a  given  dataset  by  a 
decision tree  is achieved by constructing a  rooted  tree 
graph with the leaves of the tree labeled with the values 
of  the  classification  variable  (e.g.,  strong/weak  anti(cid:173)
bacterial  activity)  and  the  intermediate  nodes  each 
representing a test based on some feature subset. Each 
branch  of  the  decision  tree  is  labeled  with  the  critical 
values  for  the  test  specified  by  the  node  above  the 
branch  (Quinlan  et a/.,  1993).  In  our  application  of  a 
decision tree to the SAR of anti-microbial  peptides, the 
physicochemical properties of peptides were the basis of 
tests  at  intermediate  nodes  and  the  resultant  terminal 
leaves  were  labeled  with  the  strength  of  antimicrobial 
activity.  Structural parameters,  such as peptide helicity, 
hydrophobicity,  hydrophobic  moment,  peptide  charge 
and the size of the hydrophobic/hydrophilic domain were 
influenced  on  membrane  activity.  Furthermore,  it  is 
assessed that the potential of these parameters increase 
antimicrobial  activity  (Dathe  et  a/.,  1999).  Of  many 
physicochemical  properties  of  peptides,  the  following 
attributes  were  selected  as  the  feature  set  for  the 
decision  tree  algorithm:  Kyte-Doolittle  hydrophobicity 
(Kyte  et  a!.,  1982),  maximum  hydrophobicity  (maxH) 
which is the best hydrophobic score obtained by calculating 
the average of hydrophobicity (H;  window size was 5), 
and hydrophobic moment (Hm). Hydrophobic moment is 
the hydrophobicity of a peptide measured for a specified 
angle  of  rotation  per  residue.  The  strength  of  each 
periodic component is the quantity that has been termed 
the  hydrophobic  moment.  For  example,  alpha  helices 
tend to  have strong  periodicity in the hydrophobicity of 
about 3.6 residues and beta sheets about 2.3 residues. It 
means that  many  peptide  sequences tend to form  the 
periodic  structure  that  maximizes  their  amphiphilicity. 
Amphiphilicity of the peptides has been reported as the 
most  important  factor  governing  antimicrobial  activity 
compared to mean hydrophobicity or alpha-helix content 

(Pathak eta/.,  1995). We also include other factors like 
helicity (He)  predicted by NNPREDICT which  is a web(cid:173)
based  secondary  structure  program  (Kneller  et  a!., 
1990), angle subtended by positively charged face (A), 
net charges  (netC),  sum  of  positive  charges  (pC)  and 
sum of negative charges  (nC).  Furthermore,  additional 
attributes confined to the helical portion of the peptides 
(i.e.  spatial  arrangement  of  each  amino  acid)  were 
selected to increase the accuracy of classification;  they 
include  hydrophobicity  (Hih),  net  charges  (netC/h), 
positive  charges  (pC/h),  hydrophobic  moment  (Hm/h), 
angle  subtended  by  positively  charged  face  (A/h)  and 
negative charges (nC/h) in helical region. 

In this study, the decis'ion was implemented by C4.5. 
C4.5 is a software extension of the basic ID3 algorithm 
designed by Quinlan (Quinlan eta/., 1993). This program 
classifies  antimicrobial  peptides  based  on  selected 
attributes which are treated as statistical property called 
information gain that measures how well a given attribute 
separates the training examples according to their target 
classification (Mitchell eta!., 1997). Information gain can 
be  further  described  by entropy that  characterizes  the 
purity and/or complexity of an arbitrary collection of data. 
In the case of peptide data set (S),  the entropy of setS 
relative to binary classification is defined as 

(1) 

where Pp  is the proportion of positive data (strong anti(cid:173)
microbial  activity)  in  S  and  Pn 
is  the  proportion  of 
negative data (weak antimicrobial activity)  inS. (In  this 
study,  any  entropy  with  OlogO  is  defined  to  be  0.) 
Therefore,  information  gain  can  be  expressed  by  the 
expected reduction in entropy caused by partitioning the 
data set according to selected attributes. More precisely, 
the information gain, Gain ( S, A) of attribute A, relative to 
a collection of data set S is defined as 

Gain(S, A)= Entropy( S)- ,e~AJ Entrap~ (S J 

(2) 

where V(A) is the set of all possible values for attribute A, 
and Svis the subset of Sfor which attribute A has value 
v.  Gain( S,  A)  is,  therefore,  the  expected  reduction  in 
entropy caused by the knowledge of the value of attribute 
A (Mitchell eta!.,  1997). 

Test all combinations of subsets of features 
All combinations of 14 features (214 = 16384) were tested. 
We  obtained  the  results  of  optimal  subset  of  features 
which the training error was smallest in each data set. 

Evaluation of the classification 
The binary classification  produced  by the decision tree 

Application of Decision Tree for the Classification of Antimicrobial  Peptide  123 

that 

was evaluated by using a stratified 5-fold cross-validation 
(Stone et at., 1974; Weiss et at., 1991 ). The training set is 
divided  into  5  equal-sized  subsets  such  that  each 
example appears in exactly one test set. The folds were 
stratified  so 
the  same 
proportions of classes as the original data set.  For each 
subset, a decision tree is constructed from examples of 
the  4  other  subsets  and  tested  on  examples  from  the 
excluded set. The average error rate over the 5 test sets 
is the error rate of a decision tree generated from all the 
data (Quinlan eta/.,  1993). 

they  would  contain 

A decision tree that is too complex may result in over(cid:173)

fitting the data. As a result, this decision tree may classify 
the training data excellently but perform poorly on some 
test data. To avoid this problem, we employed a pruning 
method described in  (Quinlan  eta/.,  1993) to make the 
decision  tree  simpler  and  more  reasonable.  Another 
approach to avoid this problem is to use a validation set. 
We divided a training data set into two. A half of a training 
set is  used to form the decision tree using c4.5 and the 
other of training set is used as a validation set, which is 
used to generate rules from the decision tree using c4.5 
rules (Quinlan eta/.,  1993). 

The overall rate of success with respect to classification 

accuracy is defined as 

Accuracy- (TN+ FP+ FN+ TP)  x1QO 

_ 

(TP+ TN! 

(3) 

where  TP  (true  positive)  is  the  number  of  correctly 
classified peptides with strong antimicrobial activity,  TN 
(true  negative)  is  the  number  of  incorrectly  classified 
peptides  with  weak  antimicrobial  activity,  FP  (false 
positive) is the number of incorrectly classified peptides 
with weak antimicrobial activity, and FN (false negative) 
is  the  number  of  incorrectly  classified  peptides  with 
strong antimicrobial activity. 

Several  other statistics  are  useful  for  more  detailed 

evaluation of the performance of the algorithms. 

Sensitivity  and  selectivity  are  often  used  for  better 
evaluation of the precision of algorithms.  Sensitivity (5,,, 
true positive rate) represents the ability to detect positive 
instances,  i.e.  the  proportion  of  correctly  classified 
peptides  with  strong  antimicrobial  activity  among  all 
antimicrobial  peptides with  strong antimicrobial  activity. 
It is a significant factor for determining the classification 
efficiency, and it is defined as 

(5) 

Selectivity (s,, true negative rate) describes the proportion 
of correctly classified peptides with low potency amongst 
all  antimicrobial  peptides  with  low  potency.  This  is 
defined as: 

Se= 

TN 

FP+ TN' 

(6) 

Furthermore,  in  order to evaluate the validity of the 
rate  of  classification,  an  F-measure  is  obtained.  F(cid:173)
measure  is  the  sum  of  average  of  the  measures  of 
precision  and  recall.  Precision value  is a  mathematical 
presentation  of  false-positives  present  in  the  final 
classification  while  the value for  recall  contains  similar 
information as ins;,. 

. . 

< zszon =  TP+ FN 

TP 

recall=  FP+ TN 

TN 

(7) 

(8) 

Therefore, the F-measure can be formulated as below 

F- measure= 

1 

1 

1 

ax  < ision  + (1- a)x  recall 
2x < isionx recall 
< ision + recall 

(9) 

(Generally, a=o.s) 

Result 
The decision tree for the classification of the peptide data 
set against  E.  coli was constructed  by  using  subset  of 
selected  features.  It  composed  of  17  nodes  with  9 
leaves.  The  rate  of  correct  prediction  for  E.  coli  was 
approximately 76.64%. The sensitivity was 86.19% while 
the  selectivity  was  62.73%.  Furthermore,  72.61%  was 
achieved 
for  the  F-measure  suggesting  significant 
accuracy  in  the  classification.  The  accuracy  and  a 
graphical illustration of the classification of the data set is 
shown in Fig.  1. 

The  overall  classification  accuracy  was  74.66%  for 
the data set classified with S. aureus. The tree (13 nodes 
with  7  leaves)  was simpler than that obtained from the 
data  set  of  E.  coli.  The  sensitivity,  selectivity  and  F(cid:173)
measure were 66.67%, 80.51% and 72.94%, respectively. 
The  accuracy and  F-measure  were  about the  same  in 
both microbes. The selectivity obtained from the data set 
of  S.  aureus  (80.51%)  was  relatively  higher  than  that 
from  the  data set  of  E.  coli (62.73%).  By contrast,  the 
sensitivity of  E.  coli (86.19%)  is  higher than  S.  aureus 
(62.73%). 

To  compare  with  the  effect  of  validation  set,  we 
constructed decision tree with and without validation set. 
As you see in table 1, the accuracy of using validation set 
was  improved  5.25%  and  3.98%,  E.  coli,  S.  aureus, 
respectively (Table 1 ) . 

124  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  2(3)  121-125, September 2004 

(A)  E  coli 

high 

> 1.974 

low 

:S; 

>  5 

/ 
. 
low  ~  high 

:5  -1.1/~-1.167 

high 

low 

low 

high 

(B)  S.  aureus 

:53 

low 

:50 

low 

Hm 

high 

:5  1.162 

> 1.162 

low 

high 

high 

Fig.  1.  A final pruned decision tree forE coli(A) and S. aureus 
(B)  showing  the  sequential  decision  tests  for  strong/weak 
anti-microbial  action  of  peptides.  Each  node  represents  a 
classification  test  based  on  the  indicated  physico-chemical 
variable.  The  branches are labeled with critical values for the 
tests 

Table. 1. The accuracy of general and our approach 

without validation  with validation  improvement 

microbes 

E  coli 

S.  aureus 

set (A) 
71.50% 
70.68% 

set (B) 
76.74% 
74.66% 

(B-A) 
5.24% 
3.98% 

Discussion 
Classification  is the  process of finding  a  set of  models 
that describe and distinguish data classes or concepts. 
Results in this study show that a decision tree with high(cid:173)
quality classification accuracy can be constructed for the 
classification  of  antimicrobial  peptides  vis-a-vis  the 
strength  of  antimicrobial  activity against  E.  coli and  S. 
aureus.  When  comparing  the  rates  of  classification 
accuracy predicted for E.  coli with that of S.  au reus,  the 

for  E.  coli  was 
rate  of  classification  accuracy 
approximately  2.08%  higher  than  that  of  S.  aureus. 
However, when considering the fact that the peptide data 
set for S.  aureus was unevenly distributed between the 
strong and weak peptides, the classification result for S. 
aureus is as significant as  the classification  for E.  coli. 
The values for  F-measure are  more suitable measures 
for estimating  the  performance for strong  antimicrobial 
peptides,  and  the  sensitivity(%)  value of 86.19% for  E. 
coli is higher than that for S. aureus (66.67%). Along this 
line, the classification accuracy may be further improved 
with evenly distributed data set. 

As shown in figure 1, the attribute measuring positive 
charges  in  helix  region  (H)  was  chosen  as  the  first 
intermediate  node  to  classify  in  E.  coli.  Attributes 
selected by information gain were used to sort peptides 
further down the tree to obtain the rate of classification 
accuracy  of  76.74%.  It  is  evident  from  the  tree  that 
certain  attributes  were  crucial 
in  achieving  high 
classification  accuracy.  Out  of  14  attributes  selected, 
three attributes (H,  A and Hm) that were selected gave 
higher accuracies in  E.  coli data set and (He,  netC and 
A/h)  attributes  were  selected  in  S.  aureus  data  sets. 
Selected features were varied according to bacteria. As 
mentioned  previously,  attributes  are  physicochemical 
properties  of  the  antimicrobial  peptides.  The  decision 
tree  for  the  classification  of  antimicrobial  peptides 
suggest  that  these  features  play  crucial  role  in  the 
strength of antimicrobial activity, and this finding concurs 
with previous reports (Dathe et at.,  1999). 

The results obtained through this study indicate that a 
decision  tree  algorithm  can  be  an  efficient  tool  for 
predicting  the  activity  of  antimicrobial  peptides. 
In 
particular,  the  algorithm  allows  us  to  extract  important 
physico-chemical  properties,  which  may  be  useful  for 
rational peptide design for many therapeutic uses. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank Dr.  Junhyong Kim for critical reading 
this manuscript. 

References 
Dathe, M., Wieprecht, T.,  Nikolenko, H., Handel, L.,  Maloy, 
W.  L., MacDonald, D.L., Beyermanna, M., and Bienerta 
M.  (1997).  Hydrophobicity,  hydrophobic  moment  and 
angle  subtended  by  charged 
residues  modulate 
antibacterial  and  haemolytic  activity  of  amphipathic 
helical peptides.  FEBS Lett. 403, 208-212. 

Dathe,  M.  and Wieprecht,  T.  (1999).  Structural features of 
helical antimicrobial peptides: their potential to modulate 

Application of Decision Tree for the Classification of Antimicrobial  Peptide  125 

hydrophobic peptides with antimicrobial activity. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 46, 3585-3590. 

Stone,  M.  (1974).  Cross-validatory choice and assessment 
of statistical  predictions  (with  discussion).  J.  Roy.  Stat. 
Soc.  B.  36,111-147. 

Tachi,  T.,  Epand,  R.F.,  Epand,  R.M.,  and  Matsuzaki,  M. 
the 
(2002).  Position-dependent  hydrophobicity  of 
antimicrobial  magainin  peptide  affects  the  mode  of 
peptide-lipid interactions and selective toxicity. Biochemistry 
41'  10723-10731. 

Vapnik,  V.N.  (1995).  The  Nature  of Statistical  Learning 

Theory (New York: Springer Verlag) 

Weiss,  S.M.  and  kulikowski,  C.A. 

(1991).  Computer 
systems that learn: classification and prediction methods 
from statistics, neural nets, machine learning, and expert 
systems. (San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann Publisher Inc.) 
Xia,  X.,  Maliski,  E.,  Cheetham,  J.,  and  Poppe,  L.  (2003). 
Solubility  prediction  by  recursive  partitioning.  Pharm. 
Res.  20,  1634-1640. 

Zasloff,  M.  (2002).  Antimicrobial  peptides  of  multicellular 

organisms.  Nature 415,  389-395. 

activity  on  model  membranes  and  biological  cells. 
Biochim.  Biophys. Acta. 1462, 71-87. 

Dathe,  M.,  Nikolenko,  H.,  Meyer,  J.,  Beyermann,  M.  and 
Bienert,  M.  (2001).  Optimization  of  the  antimicrobial 
activity of magainin peptides by modification of charge. 
FEBS Lett. 501,  146-150. 

Dathe,  M.,  Meyer,  J.,  Beyermann,  M.,  Maul,  B.,  Hoischen, 
C.,  and  Bienert,  M.  (2002).  General  aspects of  peptide 
selectivity  towards  lipid  bilayers  and  cell  membranes 
studied  by  variation  of  the  structural  parameters  of 
amphipathic helical  model  peptides.  Biochim.  Biophys. 
Acta.  1558, 171-186. 

Hong, S.Y.,  Park, T.G., and Lee,  K.H ..  (2001). The effect of 
charge increase on the specificity and activity of a short 
antimicrobial peptide.  Peptides 22,  1669-1674. 

Kim,  S.,  Kim,  S.S.,  Bang,  Y.J.,  Kim,  S.J.  and  Lee  B.J. 
(2003).  In vitro activities of native and designed peptide 
antibiotics against drug sensitive and resistant tumor cell 
lines.  Peptides 24,  945-953 

Kneller,  D.G,  Cohen,  F.E.,  and  Langridge,  R.  (1990). 
Improvements in protein secondary structure prediction 
by an  enhanced  neural  network.  J.  Mol.  Bioi.  214,  171-
182. 

Kyte,  J.  and  Doolittle,  R.F.  (1982).  A  simple  method  for 
displaying the hydropathic character of a protein. J.  Mol. 
Bioi.  157,  105-132. 

Mitchell,  T.M.  (1997).  Machine Learning (The  McGrow-Hill 

Companies Inc.) 

Park,  J.M.,  Jung,  J.E.,  and  Lee,  B.J.  (1994).  Antimicrobial 
peptides from the  skin  of a  Korean  frog,  Rana  rugosa. 
Biochem.  Biophys,  Res.  Comm.  205,  948-954 

Pathak,  N.,  Salas-Auvert,  R.,  Ruche,  G.,  Janna,  M.H., 
McCarthy, D., and Harrison, R.G. (1995). Comparison of 
the effects of hydrophobicity,  amphiphilicity,  and  alpha(cid:173)
helicity  on 
the  activities  of  antimicrobial  peptides. 
Proteins 22,  182-186 

Quinlan, J.R.  (1993).  C4.5:Programs for Machine Learning 

(Morgan Kaufmann Publisher Inc.) 

Rocca,  P.L.,  Biggin,  P.C.,  Tieleman,  D.P.,  and  Sansom 
MSP.  (1999a).  Simulation  studies  of  the  interaction  of 
lipid  bilayers.  Biochim. 
antimicrobial  peptides  and 
Biophys.  Acta.  1462, 185-200. 

Rocca, P.L., Shai, Y., and Sansom, M.S.P. (1999b). Peptide 
-bilayer  interactions:  simulations  of  dermaseptin  B,  an 
antimicrobial peptide.  Biophys.  Chern.  76,  145-159. 

Salzberg,  S.,  Deicher,  A.L.,  Fasman  K.H.,  and  Henderson 
L.  (1998).  A  decision  tree  system  for  finding  genes  in 
DNA. J.  Comput.  Bioi.  5,  667-680. 

Selbig,  J.,  Mevissen,  T.,  and  Lenauer,  T.  (1999).  Decision 
tree-based  formation  of  consensus  protein  secondary 
structure prediction.  Bioinformatics 15,  1 039-1 046. 

Stark,  M.,  Liu,  L.P.,  and  Deber,  C.M.  (2002).  Cationic 

