Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  19-27,  March  2011

Standard-based  Integration  of  Heterogeneous  Large-scale 
DNA  Microarray  Data  for  Improving  Reusability

Yong  Jung1¶,  Hwa  Jeong  Seo4¶,  Yu  Rang 
Park1,  Jihun  Kim1,2,3,  Sang  Jay  Bien1  and  Ju 
Han  Kim1,2,3*

1Seoul  National  University  Biomedical  Informatics,  2Sys-
tems  Biomedical 
Informatics  Research  Center,  and 
3Institute  of  Endemic  Diseases,  Seoul  National  Universi-
ty  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  110-799,  Korea,  4Medical 
Informatics,  Graduate  School  of  Public  Health,  Gachon 
University  of  Medicine  and  Science,  Incheon  405-760, 
Korea 

Abstract

Gene  Expression  Omnibus  (GEO)  has  kept  the  largest 
amount  of  gene-expression  microarray  data  that  have 
grown  exponentially.  Microarray  data  in  GEO  have  been 
generated  in  many  different  formats  and  often  lack 
standardized  annotation  and  documentation.  It  is  hard 
to  know  if  preprocessing  has  been  applied  to  a  dataset 
or  not  and  in  what  way.  Standard-based  integration  of 
heterogeneous  data  formats  and  metadata  is  necessary 
for  comprehensive  data  query,  analysis  and  mining.  We 
attempted  to  integrate  the  heterogeneous  microarray 
data  in  GEO  based  on  Minimum  Information  About  a 
Microarray  Experiment  (MIAME)  standard.  We  unified  the 
data  fields  of  GEO  Data  table  and  mapped  the  attrib-
utes  of  GEO  metadata  into  MIAME  elements.  We  also 
discriminated  non-preprocessed  raw  datasets  from  oth-
ers  and  processed  ones  by  using  a  two-step  classi-
fication  method.  Most  of  the  procedures  were  devel-
oped  as  semi-automated  algorithms  with  some  degree 
of  text  mining  techniques.  We  localized  2,967  Platforms, 
4,867  Series  and  103,590  Samples  with  covering  279 
organisms,  integrated  them  into  a  standard-based  rela-
tional  schema  and  developed  a  comprehensive  query  in-
terface  to  extract.  Our  tool,  GEOQuest  is  available  at 
http://www.snubi.org/software/GEOQuest/

Keywords:  gene  expression  data,  data  integration,  clas-
sification

¶Both  authors  contributed  equally.
*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  juhan@snu.ac.kr 
Tel  +82-2-740-8320,  Fax  +82-2-747-8928
Accepted  2  March  2011

Introduction

in 

the 

After  genome  sequencing,  DNA  microarray  analysis  has 
become  the  most  widely  used  source  of  genome-scale 
data  in  the  life  sciences  (Allison et al.,  2006;  Brazma et 
al.,  2001).  DNA  microarray  is  a  high-throughput  and  da-
ta-intensive  technology  that  provides  the  means  of 
measuring  the  expression  of  thousands  of  genes  or  pro-
teins  simultaneously  and  brings  the  unprecedented  de-
velopment 
informatics  and  analysis  aspect 
(Chaussabel  and  Sher,  2002;  Quackenbush,  2002). 
Since  this  technique  provides  researchers  with  compre-
hensive  understanding  of  biological  complex  features,  it 
has  been  used  in  not  only  biological  but  also  clinical 
field. 
    As  many  microarray  experiments  generate  large  data 
sets  that  can  contain  tens  to  hundreds  of  samples, 
however,  it  has  needed  to  be  managed  systematically 
with  computational  tools  due  to  their  own  complexity. 
Moreover,  requirements  for  ensuring  the  scientific  in-
tegrity  of  data  and  sharing  the  data  have  given  rise  to 
development  of  public  microarray  repositories  like  GEO 
(Barrett  et al.,  2007),  ArrayExpress  (Parkinson  et al., 
2007),  Stanford  Microarray  Database  (SMD)  (Gollub  et 
al.,  2003),  keeping  pace  with  the  standardization  (Edgar 
and  Barrett,  2006;  Perou,  2001).  With  appearance  of 
them,  the  data  generated  in  one  laboratory  can  be  avail-
able  to  other  researchers  and  various  analytical  methods 
uncover  different  biological  insights.
    Especially,  NCBI  GEO  has  kept  the  largest  amount  of 
gene  expression  data  which  have  grown  exponentially, 
currently  holdingover  200,000  samples.  Recently,  re-
searches  to  find  clinical  or  biological  meaning  using 
GEO  data  have  been  actively  performed  to  show  its 
reusability.  Butte et al.  (2006)  constructed  Phenome-Ge-
nome  network,  Disease  Nosology  and  Gene-Behavior- 
Disease  through  analysis  of  huge  amounts  of  gene  ex-
pression  data  in  GEO  using  Unified  Medical  Language 
System  (UMLS)  (Humphreys  et al.,  1998).  Yoon  et al. 
(2006)  constructed  an  application  tool  to  provide  the 
present  large-scale  approach  for  the  analysis  of  GEO 
microarray  data. 
    Though  GEO  has  abundant  practical  possibilities,  it 
does  not  support  the  standard  format  or  model  but  its 
self-structured  format.  Moreover,  it  stores  the  microarray 
data  without  distinguishing  processed  data  and  raw 
data.  These  factors  hinder  providing  a  comprehensive 
biological  analysis  environment  and  future  integration  of 

20    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  19-27,  March  2011

the  external  resources  and  make  extracting  the  desired 
information  difficult.
    Currently,  some  tools  have  been  developed  to  utilize 
large-scale  GEO  data  -  SeqExpress  (Boyle,  2005), 
GEOQuery  (Sean  and  Meltzer,  2007),  ArrayQuest  (Ar-
graves  et al.,  2005).  However,  there  is  a  limitation  that 
they  can  handle  only  GEO  DataSets  which  are  curated 
by  GEO  staffs.
    To  solve  the  problem  and  overcome  the  limitation,  we 
attempted  integration  of  heterogeneous  microarray  data 
in  GEO  using  microarray  data  standard,  Minimum  Infor-
mation  About  a  Microarray  Experiment  (MIAME).  In 
GEO,  it  encourages  submitters  to  supply  MIAME  stand-
ard  compliant  data.  However,  it  is  not  related  to  the  for-
mat,  but  rather  to  the  content  provided. 
    We  performed  data  field  unification  of  GEO  Data  table 
and  distinguished  between  raw  data  and  transformed 
data  using  classification  method.  To  integrate  the  data 
in  an  efficient  and  accurate  manner,  these  processes 
were  developed  in  both  manual  and  semi-automated 
way  (Vita  et al.,  2006).

Methods

Biological  research  increasingly  depends  on  computa-
tional  analysis  of  data  (Miotto  et al.,  2005).  A  pre-
requisite  for  computational  analysis  is  the  availability  of 
experimental  data  in  a  formalized,  structured  and  ma-
chine-readable  format.  GEO  offers  DataSet  (GDS)  which 
represents  a  curated  collection  of  biologically  and  stat-
istically  comparable  data  for  computational  analysis 
method.  However,  there  is  a  limitation  that  GEO  data 
are  reassembled  mainly  for  not  entire  GEO  data  but  a 
unit  of  GEO  Series  (GSE)  only. 
    To  overcome  the  limitation  and  provide  a  compre-
hensive  biological  analysis  environment,  we  attempted 
integration  of  heterogeneous  microarray  data  in  GEO 
using  microarray  data  standard,  Minimum  Information 
About  a  Microarray  Experiment  (MIAME).  Workflows  are 
as  follows  (Fig.  1):  GEO  data  localization,  Data  field  uni-
fication,  Data  transformation  classification,  Standard- 

Table  1.  Criteria  for  data  field  unification

based  integration  of  heterogeneous  microarray  data, 
and  GEO  data  update.

Gene  expression  omnibus

GEO  is  an  international  repository  for  gene  expression 
data.  It  is  developed  and  maintained  by  the  National 
Library  of  Medicine  (NLM).  It  serves  as  a  public  re-
pository 
for  a  wide  range  of  high-throughput  ex-
perimental  data  like  single  and  dual  channel  micro-
array-based  experiments  measuring  mRNA,  miRNA,  ge-
nomic  DNA  and  protein  abundance. 
    In  GEO,  the  basic  entity  types  are  Platform,  Sample 
and  Series.  Platform  includes  a  summary  description  of 
the  array  (Descriptive  information)  and  a  data  table  de-
fining  the  array  template  (Data  table).  Each  row  in  the 
data  table  corresponds  to  a  single  element,  and  in-
cludes  sequence  annotation  and  tracking  information  as 

Fig.  1.  The  workflow  of  standard-based  integration.  As  in-
dicated,  the  integration  of  heterogeneous  GEO  data  into 
standard  based-format  was  through  several  processes.

Entity

Property  of  representative  fields

Platform

Sample Dual  channel

Single  channel Spotted  DNA/cDNA

Required  field  of  MIAME,  Required  field  of  GEO,  Public  biological  database 
    name  (ex.  GenBank,  Unigene,  Entrez  Gene  and  so  on  (Wheeler et al.,  2007).)
Required  field  of  GEO,  GenePix  Results  file  format
Required  field  of  GEO,  GEO  fields  used  mostly  and  mainly

Spotted  oligonucleotide
In  situ  oligonucleotide
Affymetrix

Number 
of  fields

42

83
30
53
15
37

Standard-based  Integration  of  Heterogeneous  Large-scale  DNA  Microarray  Data  for  Improving  Reusability    21

provided  by  the  submitter.  Sample  includes  a  descrip-
tion  of  the  biological  source  and  the  experimental  proto-
cols  to  which  it  was  subjected  (Descriptive  information), 
and  a  data  table  containing  hybridization  measurements 
for  each  element  on  the  corresponding  Platform  (Data 
table).  Series  defines  a  set  of  related  Samples  consid-
ered  to  be  part  of  a  study,  and  describes  the  overall 
study  aim  and  design.  Each  of  these  entities  is  assigned 
an  accession  number  that  may  be  used  to  cite  and  re-
trieve  the  records.
    Each  entity  type  has  ‘Descriptive  information’  for  de-
scribing  each  entity’s  correspondent  information.  Plat-
form  and  Sample  have  ‘Data  table’  which  consists  of 
‘Header’  and  ‘Matrix’.  Header  identifies  the  attributes  of 
each  column  of  Matrix.  Matrix  includes  each  entity’s 
correspondent  data  contents.

GEO  data  localization

We  accessed  and  downloaded  all  GEO  data  on  January 
22,  2007.  Python 
language  and  MySQL  DataBase 
Management  System  were  used  in  Linux  system  for  lo-
calizing  GEO  database.  Since  data  in  GEO’s  File  Transfer 
Protocol  were  updated  late  at  that  time,  we  used 
HyperText  Markup  Language  (HTML)  documents  from 
which  users  can  see  web  page.  Accession  Display  -  ac-
cession  to  the  data  through  GEO  accession  number  - 
was  used  to  automatically  download  all  GEO  data.  Using 
specific  HTML  tag  structure,  we  localized  all  GEO  data.
    To  integrate  increasingly  large  volume  of  GEO  data, 
formalizing  loosely-defined  format  of  GEO  is  an  indis-
pensable  process.  First,  we  determined  representative 
fields  and  constructed  mapping  tables  for  Data  table  of 
three  technology  types  -  ‘spotted  DNA/cDNA’,  ‘spotted 
oligonucleotide’,  and  ‘in  situ  oligonucleotide’.  The  cri-
teria  of  determining  representative  fields  for  data  field 
unification  are  shown  in  Table  1.
    To  construct  each  mapping  table,  we  adapted  a  sim-
ple  text-mining  method  and  performed  through  manual 
curation  with  checking  a  description  and  values  of  each 
field.  Through  the  mapping  tables,  we  mapped  fields  of 
all  GEO  Data  table  into  each  representative  field.  Five 
database  tables  are  used  to  store  the  GEO  Data  table 
for  Platform,  dual  channel  Sample,  and  three  technology 
types  in  single  channel  Sample.  Ambiguous  cases  on 
mapping  them  are  treated  by  EAV  (Entity-Attribute- 
Value)  table  (Johnson et al.,  1997)  to  prevent  loss  of  da-
ta  caused  by  the  mapping  process. 
    After  inserting  data  into  each  result  table  is  com-
pleted,  the  four  tables  of  Sample  are  integrated  through 
the  next  step

Data  field  unification

the  art 

The  GEO  database  architecture  is  designed  for  the  effi-
cient capture and storage of heterogeneous high-through-
put  data  sets.  The  structure  is  sufficiently  flexible  to  ac-
commodate  evolving  state  of 
technologies 
(Barrett  and  Edgar,  2006).  Consequently,  the  data  have 
many  different  styles  and  comprise  varying  contents. 
    Due  to  the  flexibility,  GEO  stores  the  data  which  in-
clude  the  words  having  the  same  concept  but  different 
spelling  or  some  misspelled  words  without  any  control 
process.  This  characteristic  increases  heterogeneity  be-
tween  data  in  GEO  and  makes  future  integration  of  this 
resource  with  other  biological  and  clinical  data  difficult. 

Standard-based 
microarray  data

integration  of  heterogeneous 

Data  standard  is  an  essential  requirement  for  repre-
sentation  of  information  to  ensure  proper  semantic  in-
tegration  of  heterogeneous  data,  and  also  for  communi-
cation  standards  to  ensure  interoperability  between  dis-
parate  data  sources  (Louie et al.,  2007;  Martin-Sanchez 
et al.,  2004).  In  microarray  data,  the  introduction  of  the 
MIAME  standard  has  been  a  great  success  (Rayner  et 
al.,  2006).  However,  the  data  format  of  GEO  does  not 
follow  the  standard.  Therefore,  it  hinders  semantic  in-
tegration  and  interoperability  between  heterogeneous 
microarray  data.  For  the  reason,  we  customized  the 
GEO  data  into  MIAME  standard-based  format.
    First,  we  analyzed  attributes  of  Descriptive  information 
in  each  GEO  entity  to  understand  that  which  GEO  at-
tribute  corresponds  to  which  part  of  MIAME.  Second, 
we  mapped  GEO  attributes  to  elements  in  each  part  of 
MIAME  and  stored  them  into  the  database.  Third,  we 
mapped  values  of  some  GEO  attributes  into  controlled 
terms  from  the  MGED  Ontology  (http://mged.sourceforge. 
net/ontologies/index.php).  For  example,  we  performed 
to 
mapping 
TechnologyType  class  and  from  ‘type’  in  Series  to  both 
MethodologicalDesign  class  and  ExperimentalFactor 
class.  In  case  of  the  ‘type’  in  Series,  there  are  the  mul-
tiple  values  in  one  text,  we  split  the  text  into  single 
values.  In  the  second  and  third  processes,  we  per-
formed  both  a  simple  text  mining  method  and  manual 
curation  with  checking  a  description  and  values  of  each 
field.  Finally,  microarray  data  in  which  data  field  uni-
fication  process  is  done  are  stored  into  one  database 
table  according  to  classification  result  between  log-like 
transformed  data  and  raw  data.

in  Platform 

from 

‘technology 

type’ 

22    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  19-27,  March  2011

Data  transformation  classification

The  hypothesis  underlying  microarray  analysis  is  that 
the  measured  intensities  for  each  arrayed  gene  repre-
sent  its  relative  expression  level.  Before  the  levels  can 
be  compared  appropriately,  a  number  of  transformations 
must  be  carried  out  on  the  data  to  adjust  the  measured 
intensities  to  facilitate  comparisons  and  to  select  genes 
that  are  significantly  differentially  expressed  (Quacken-
bush,  2002).
    In  microarray  data  analysis,  difference  between  raw 
data  and  transformed  data  affects  analysis  results 
importantly.  Moreover,  MIAME  provides  the  conceptual 
structure  for  the  representation  of  microarray  data  in-
cluding  raw  and  processed  data  (Brazma  et al.,  2001; 
Rayner et al.,  2006).  However,  both  raw  data  and  trans-
formed  data  are  stored  together  in  GEO  with  no 
separation.  For  the  reasons,  we  must  distinguish  be-
tween  transformed  data  and  raw  data.  Even  though 
submitters  are  encouraged  to  describe  about  a  process 
of  Sample  ‘Value’  field  which  indicates  final  expression 
value  measurements,  a  large  part  of  ‘Value’  fields 
have  not  only  an  ambiguous  description  or  no  descrip-
tion  but  even  wrong  description  (Table  2). 

Table  2.  Cases  of  transformation  method  treated  as 
log-like  transformation

GEO  Description

RMA  calculated  Signal  intensity
RMA  Express  calculated 

the  Signal  values

RMA-calculated  Signal  intensity 

(natural  scale)

This  is  the  gene  expression  value 

following  quantile  normalization 
and  robust  multi-array  analysis.

Expression  values  represented  by 
RMA  (R/Bioconductor;  http://www. 
bioconductor.org/)

Same  as  UNF_VALUE  but  with 

flagged  values  remove

Class  by 
description

Log-like

Log-like

Human 
validation

Not  Log

Not  Log

Log-like

Not  Log

Log-like

Not  Log

Log-like

Not  Log

Log-like

Not  Log

Table  3.    List  in  wrong  description  of  data  processing 
among  200  GEO  Sample  data  sampled  randomly

Representative  method

List  of  methods

Log-like  transformation 
    value

Log  transformed  value
UNF_VALUE
Z-transformed  value
Robust  Multichip  Average  (RMA)  value
VSN  transformation

    In  this  paper,  we  assumed  that  the  log  transformation 
are  mainly  used  among  the  several  transformation  proc-
esses  and  attempted  to  distinguish  raw  data  and 
log-like  transformed  data.  We  treated  some  trans-
formation  method  as  log-like  transformation  (Table  3). 
We  propose  a  model  for  data  processing  classification 
using  machine  learning  techniques.

Selection  of  a  training  data  set 
For  most  classification  study,  a  training  data  set  con-
sisting  of  records  whose  class  labels  are  known  must 
be  provided.  It  is  necessary  to  select  training  data  prop-
erly  because  the  training  data  set  is  used  to  build  a 
classification  model.  First,  we  performed  simple  random 
sampling  and  extracted  200  GEO  Samples.  Sampling  is 
a  commonly  used  approach  for  selecting  a  subset  of 
the  data  objects  to  be  analyzed.  Next,  we  classify  data 
manually  in  compliance  with  three  criteria  for  giving  the 
correct  class  to  data.

   •  Description  of  ‘Value’  field  in  GEO  Sample
   •  Range  of  data  distribution
   •  Symmetricity  of  distribution

    In  the  classification  process,  guarantee  of  data  quality 
is  very  important  factor.  We  trimmed  two-tailed  5%  val-
ues  of  the  distribution  in  each  Sample  to  remove  out-
liers  before  selection  of  training  data.  We  extracted  188 
GEO  Samples  for  three  criteria  and  emailed  to  data 
submitters  of  12  Samples,  the  rest  of  the  data  set.  As 
a  result,  190  Samples  are  determined  as  training  set  (96 
Log-like  transformed  data,  and  94  Not-log  transformed 
data). 

Learning  process  for  classification  model
We  determined  the  features  that  can  explain  a  differ-
ence  between  two  classes  to  create  a  classification 
model.
    The  first  one  is  the  difference  of  the  skewness  values 
between  original  distribution  and  its  log-like  transformed 
distribution  (DSD).  Skewness  is  a  measure  of  the  asym-

Fig.  2.  Difference  of  distribution  between  raw  data  and 
log-transformed  data  in  an  identical  data.

Standard-based  Integration  of  Heterogeneous  Large-scale  DNA  Microarray  Data  for  Improving  Reusability    23

metry  of  the  data  of  the  probability  distribution:

skewness

=

   

m
3
3
σ

,

m
3

=

n

i

−

i∑
x
(
n

1
=

X

3

)

(1)

    where  χi  is  each  value  of  the  distribution  and  x  rep-
resents  the  mean  value  of  the  distribution. n  is  the  num-
ber  of  values  in  the  distribution.
    If  expression  values  of  raw  data  are  log-like  trans-
formed,  the  skewness  of  original  distribution  is  changed 
remarkably  (Fig.  2).  However,  if  those  of  log-like  trans-
formed  data  are  log-like  transformed  again,  the  skew-
ness  is  changed  slightly.  This  characteristic  makes  the 
feature  available  for  the  classification  model.
    Second,  a  maximum  value  of  data  (MD)  is  concerned. 
Common 
typically  16-bit 
Tagged  Information  File  Format  (TIFF)  images.  Therefore, 
the  log-like  transformed  data  have  rarely  over  16.  On 
the  other  hand,  raw  data  can  have  values  more  than 
thousands.  Since  the  maximum  value  can  be  a  good 
factor  for  the  classification  process,  we  include  this 
feature.
    To  determine  the  classification  model,  we  adopted 
the  logistic  regression  method  with  these  features:

image  scanners  generate 

y

+=
βα

x
,11

i

+

+

β
k

x

,,
ik

L

i

=

,1

,

n

K

   

(2)

where y  is  defined  as  above  and  xk,i  is  the  value  of  fea-
tures  of  ith  GEO  Sample  data. k  is  the  number  of  fea-
tures  and n  is  the  number  of  GEO  Samples.  The  logistic 
regression  has  several  strengths.  1)  It  is  not  restricted  to 
data.  2)  It  can  represent  the  model  easily.  3)  It  can  clas-
sify  the  data  into  each  group  with  ease.  4)  It  finds  the 
best  explanatory  variable.  We  can  predict  the  class, 
log-like  transformed  or  not  for  any  GEO  Sample  data 
using  the  output  computed  by  the  model.  If  y  is  the 
positive  value,  the  data  is  classified  as  log-like  trans-
formed  data.  If  y  is  the  negative  value,  it  is  classified  as 
not  log-like  transformed  data.

Set-wise  validation  of  classification  result
10  Sample  data  excluded  from  200  Sample  data  were 
used  to  validate  the  classification  model.  We  performed 
classification  of  10  data  and  case-study  of  its  result.  A 
GEO  Series  is  a  group  of  related  GEO  Samples.  Thus, 
we  can  assume  that  Samples  in  a  Series  should  be 
classified  as  same  class.  However,  it  is  found  that 
Samples  are  classified  with  different  class  in  a  Series. 
To  solve  this  case,  we  adopted  simple  voting  method 
and  classified  Samples  in  a  Series  as  a  class  with  which 
Samples  are  classified  more.

GEO  data  update

As  an  amount  of  GEO  data  grows  exponentially,  we 
need  to  update  the  data  continuously.  For  incremental 
update,  we  extract  a  list  of  GEO  accession  numbers 
and  release  date  in  our  database.  Next,  if  a  new  data 
is  not  in  the  list,  we  download,  process,  and  store  it  into 
the  database.  To  trace  the  update  status,  accession 
numbers  of  updated  data  and  the  updated  date  are 
written  in  a  log  file.
    Besides,  authority  of  data  in  GEO  changed  often  pub-
lic  to  private,  and  vice  versa.  We  also  recorded  the  ac-
cession  numbers  of  the  data  in  the  log  file.  Update 
workflow  is  shown  in  Fig.  3. 

Results

Data  field  unification

In  this  section,  we  focused  on  constructing  the  mapping 
tables  for  each  technology  type  and  each  manufacturer. 
Through  a  simple  text-mining  method  and  manual  cura-
tion,  we  mapped  the  fields  which  are  written  in  various 
strings  into  one  representative  field.  Table  1  shows  the 
example  of  words  which  have  various  strings  for  a 
concept.
    There  are  around  3,000  distinct  fields  in  Platform  and 
Sample  Data  tables  respectively.  Since  most  of  the  data 
fields  are  recorded  irregularly,  we  have  to  unify  them 
manually.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fields  of  dual  channel 

Fig.  3.  General  workflow  of  GEO  data  update. 

24    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  19-27,  March  2011

Table  4.  GEO  field  mapping  result

Entity

Technology 

Number  of 

Mapped 

type

samples

fields

Total  fields

Table  5.  Mapping  GEO  data  elements  into  core  database 
tables  based  on  the  MIAME  standard

MIAME  element

GEO  Entity

GEO  attribute

Platform Spotted 

1,437

1,253

Experiment

Series

Title
Type
Summary
Overall  design
PubMed  ID
Web  link
Organism
Label
Label  protocol
Extracted  protocol
Extracted  molecule
Growth  protocol
Treatment  protocol
Source
Biomaterial  provider
Description
Characteristic
Title
Distribution
Technology  type
Manufacturer
Manufacturer  Protocol
Catalog  number
Coating
Support
Description
Hybridization  Protocol
Description
Sample  type
Scan  protocol
Data  processing

Biological  samples, 

Sample

preparation  extraction
and  labeling

Array

Platform

Hybridization

Sample

Measurement

Sample

(57,052  single  channels  and  46,538  dual  channels)  and 
4,867  Series  in  our  database.  In  the  database,  we  inves-
tigated  the  distribution  of  organism,  source,  and  ex-
tracted  molecule  in  microarray  experiments  (Table  6). 
The  view  of  the  results  reflects  that  the  most  interesting 
experiments  in  the  present  researches  have  been  con-
cerned  with  Homo  sapiens.  Moreover,  it  shows  that  the 
breast  tissue  is  mostly  used  as  a  material  for  experi-
ments  and  that  breast  cancer  is  a  matter  of  primary 
concern  in  cancer  research.  In  a  part  of  Extracted 
Molecule,  the  distribution  means  the  data  stored  in  GEO 
mainly  result  from  array-based  experiments  in  which  re-
searches  of  transcriptional  pattern  is  accomplished.

Data  transformation  classification

Classification  using  Logistic  Regression  model
The  initial  classification  is  done  by  logistic  regression, 
which  is  used  when  users  have  a  binary  dependent 
variable.  The  training  data  set  currently  consists  of  190 

748

687

4,670

3,217

431

  DNA/cDNA
Spotted 
  oligonucleotide
In  situ 
  oligonucleotide
Spotted 
  DNA/cDNA
Spotted 
  oligonucleotide
In  situ 
  oligonucleotide
Affymetrix
All

Single 
  channel 
  sample

Dual 
  channel 
  sample

958

462

218

180

85

16

817

387

343

97

21

49,253
46,019

193
2,705

240
3,858

in  Sample  are  stored  in  partially  regular  pattern.  We  per-
formed  a  simple  text  mining  method  (exact  match)  and 
obtained  a  precision  of  0.8474  (544/642),  a  recall  of 
0.2011 
(544/2,705),  and  the  F-measure  of  0.3248. 
Through  its  method  was  not  reliable  as  the  result 
shows,  it  was  helpful  to  reduce  a  time-consuming 
process.  The  unification  result  is  shown  in  Table  4.

Standard-based 
microarray  data

integration  of  heterogeneous 

We  designed  a  core  relational  database  according  to  the 
MIAME  standard-based  format.  In  it,  the  GEO  data  is 
customized  according  to  the  result  of  mapping  GEO  at-
tributes  to  elements  in  each  part  of  MIAME.  A  compre-
hensive  view  of  mapping  result  is  presented  in  Table  5.
    We  mapped  values  of  attributes  in  GEO  (‘technology 
type’  in  Platform,  ‘type’  in  Series,  ‘Extracted  molecule’ 
and  ‘Label’  in  Sample)  into  terms  from  MGED  Ontology 
(TechnologyType, MethodologicalDesign and Experimen-
talFactor, and LabeledExtract class)  respectively.  Like 
data  field  unification  process,  we  performed  a  simple 
text  mining  method.  Among  4,495  values  in  GEO,  2,537 
values  are  mapped  to  MGED  Ontology  and  1,958  values 
are  stored  as  they  are.  Other  database  tables  have 
been  implemented  in  order  to  collect  data  regarding  all 
submitters,  laboratories  or  organizations  which  take  part 
in  each  experiment  and  to  handle  the  case  that  a 
Sample  included  in  multiple  Series.  All  data  regarding 
microarray  experiment  results  (Data  table)  are  stored  in 
the  additional  database  tables  according  to  its  trans-
formation  characteristic.
    Finally,  we  hold  2,967  Platforms,  103,590  Samples 

Standard-based  Integration  of  Heterogeneous  Large-scale  DNA  Microarray  Data  for  Improving  Reusability    25

Table  6.  Distribution  of  top  five  ranked  terms  for  organ-
ism,  source,  and  extracted  molecule

Table  8.  Contingency  table  for  data  set  in  which  different 
classification  results  for  each  sample  in  a  series

GEO  feature

Term

Organism

Source

Extracted 
  molecule

Homo  sapiens
Mus  musculus
Rattus  norvegicus
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae
Arabidopsis  thaliana
Breast  tumor
Pool
DNA  was  obtained  from  NIGHS 
  Human  Genetic  Cell  Repository
Breast
Lymphoblastoid  cell  line
Total  RNA
Genomic  DNA
PolyA  RNA
Protein
Other

Count

53,989
22,679
8,620
6,736
4,961
1,691
1,484
1,152

1,022
769
93,839
7,936
1,224
385
204

Table  7.  Contingency  table  for  logistic  regression  learning 
result

Actual

Log-like
Not  Log
Total

Predicted

Log-like

Not  Log

96
  0
96

  0
94
94

Total

  96
  94
190

examples.
    After  learning  process,  we  can  obtain  the  classi-
fication  model  and  the  contingency  table  as  a  learning 
result  (Table  7).  As  we  can  see  the  result,  we  obtained 
a  sensitivity  of  1.0  (96/96)  and  a  specificity  of  1.0 
(94/94). 

Set-wise  validation
To  test  the  classification  model,  we  performed  classi-
fication  for  the  10  Sample  data  excluded  from  200 
Sample  data  which  were  sampled  randomly  to  make 
training  data  set.  We  assumed  that  basically,  Samples 
in  a  Series  have  same  classification  results.  Among  the 
10  classification  results,  however,  we  found  a  ques-
tionable  result.  Though  two  Samples  are  included  in 
same  Series,  one  was  classified  as  Log-transformed  da-
ta  and  the  other  was  not.  For  the  reason,  we  consid-
ered  Series  as  a  set  and  attempted  the  set-wise 
validation. 
    We  applied  our  classification  model  to  entire  data  set 
and  extracted  the  data  which  correspond  to  ques-
tionable  case.  Entire  data  consist  of  3,911  Series  which 

Actual

Log-like
Not  log
Total

Predicted

Log-like

Not  Log

2,896
  325
3,221

  257
1,398
1,655

Total

3,153
1,723
4,876

Table  9.  Comparison  of  logistic  regression  model  and 
mixed  model  with  validation  on  data  subset  (DCS)  and  en-
tire  data  set

Measurement

Logistic  regression

Logistic  regression＋

voting

DCS

Total

DCS

Total

Accuracy
Error  rate
Sensitivity
Specificity
Precision
Recall
F-measure

0.8806
0.1194
0.9185
0.8114
0.8991
0.9185
0.9087

0.9940
0.0060
0.9954
0.9921
0.9942
0.9954
0.9948

0.9967
0.0033
0.9990
0.9925
0.9959
0.9990
0.9974

0.9998
0.0002
0.9999
0.9997
0.9998
0.9999
0.9999

include  97,026  Samples.  The  reason  why  the  number  of 
entire  Samples  is  not  103.590  is  that  GEO  Values  of 
6,564  Samples  have  only  ‘null’  string  or  zero  value. 
As  a  result,  we  found  103  Series  which  include  4,876 
Samples.  These  data  were  classified  by  humans  to  vali-
date  the  classification  model  (Table  8).
    To  solve  this  problem,  we  applied  a  simple  voting 
method.  For  example,  if  the  number  of  log-like  trans-
formed  class  is  more  than  that  of  not-log  transformed 
one  in  a  Series,  all  Samples  in  the  Series  are  assigned 
to  the  log-like  transformed  class.  If  the  number  of 
log-like  transformed  class  is  equal  to  that  of  the  not-log 
transformed  one,  all  Samples  are  assigned  to  what  they 
are  classified  as.  We  tested  both  the  original  classi-
fication  model  and  a  combination  of  the  model  and  vot-
ing  method  on  data  sets  differently  classified  in  a  Series 
(DCS)  and  entire  data  set,  respectively.  The  results  are 
presented  in  Table  9  with  various  evaluation  measure-
ments. 
    As  a  result  of  classification  for  all  GEO  data,  56,012 
log-like  transformed  data  and  41,014  not-log  trans-
formed  data  are  stored  into  separated  database  tables.

Query  Interface

The  integrated  database  can  be  queried  on  the  World 
Wide  Web  at  http://geo.snubi.org/~geoxperanto/html/ 

26    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  9(1)  19-27,  March  2011

be  possible.  Integration  strategies  we  proposed  allow 
the  GEO  to  progress  remarkably  toward  a  more  stand-
ardized  repository  and  to  serve  as  a  more  uniform  plat-
form  for  microarray  data  analysis.  Also,  published  re-
search  studies  using  GEO  data  can  be  expanded  and 
improved  with  our  database  and  analysis  approaches 
(Yoon  et al.,  2006)  which  have  been  published.
    Yet,  we  have  some  problem  to  solve  further.  In  data 
field  unification,  we  can  not  handle  polysemy  problem, 
which  means  the  case  that  a  word  has  many  meanings. 
An  important  next  step  is  to  adapt  natural  language 
processing  method  to  solve  not  only  the  problem  but  al-
so  new  terms  which  will  be  input  in  GEO.  In  set-wise 
validation  of  data  transformation  classification,  we  as-
sumed  that  all  Samples  in  a  Series  have  same  classi-
fication  results.  This  assumption  may  miss  some  case  of 
a  false  positive  result  in  a  Series  for  entire  data  set. 
With  human  validation  for  entire  data  set,  we  can  cor-
rect  our  validation  result.
    At  the  conclusion,  we  suggest  to  data  submitters  that 
they  submit  their  data  with  the  correct  description  in  the 
unified  format  to  collaborate  with  researchers  in  other 
fields  or  to  provide  machine-readable  data  for  computa-
tional  post-analysis.  The  effort  may  lead  to  improve  the 
computational  analysis  results  for  the  discovery  of  re-
markable  biological  knowledge.

Acknowledgements

through 

This  study  was  supported  by  a  grant  from  a  Basic 
Science  Research  Program 
the  National 
Research  Foundation  of  Korea  (NRF)  funded  by  the 
Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology 
(2010-0028631).  YRP’s  educational  training  was  sup-
ported  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  &  Welfare,  Republic  of 
Korea  (A040002). 

References

Allison,  D.B.,  Cui,  X.,  Page,  G.P.,  and  Sabripour,  M.  (2006). 
Microarray  data  analysis:  from  disarray  to  consolidation 
and  consensus.  Nat. Rev. Genet.  7,  55-65.

Argraves,  G.L.,  Jani,  S.,  Barth,  J.L.,  and  Argraves,  W.S. 
(2005).  ArrayQuest:  a  web  resource  for  the  analysis  of 
DNA  microarray  data.  BMC Bioinformatics  6,  287.

Ball,  C.A.,  and  Brazma,  A.  (2006).  MGED  standards:  work 

in  progress.  OMICS  10,  138-144.

Barrett,  T.,  and  Edgar,  R.  (2006).  Gene  expression  omnibus: 
retrieval,  and 

microarray  data  storage,  submission, 
analysis.  Methods Enzymol.  411,  352-369.

Barrett,  T.,  Troup,  D.B.,  Wilhite,  S.E.,  Ledoux,  P.,  Rudnev, 
D.,  Evangelista,  C.,  Kim,  I.F.,  Soboleva,  A.,  Tomashevsky, 
M.,  and  Edgar,  R.  (2007).  NCBI  GEO:  mining  tens  of  mil-
lions  of  expression  profiles--database  and  tools  update. 

Fig.  4.  Query  interface  of  an  integrated  database  of  GEO. 
Some  of  GEO  terms  are  mapped  to  MGED  Ontology.  It 
makes  it  possible  to  search  a  categorized  term.

GEORetrieval/GEORet_Inter.html  (Fig.  4)  This  interface 
enables  users  to  search  hybridization-centered  data.  In 
comparison  with  free  text  search  of  GEO  Entrez  Search 
System,  users  can  search  the  database  efficiently  due 
to  partially  itemized  GEO  terms.

Discussion

Some  main  issues  of  management  in  production  of  mi-
croarray  experiments  are  the  large  amount  of  in-
formation  produced  and  their  heterogeneity.  Therefore,  it 
is  important  to  make  independently  collected  microarray 
data  conform  to  standard  for  sharing  of  data  efficiently 
and  be  comparable  with  each  other.  The  MIAME  stand-
ard  can  serve  both  bioinformaticians  and  biologists  to 
deal  with  the  former  issue.  To  solve  the  latter  issue,  mi-
croarray  data  must  be  classified  by  transformation 
method.  In  the  process  of  data  classification,  we  found 
that  a  combination  of  a  classification  model  and  other 
method  can  boost  the  performance  of  classification 
(Chen et al.,  2006).  We  have  presented  a  simple  but  ef-
fective  two-step  method.  It  consists  of  a  Logistic 
Regression  model  as  well  as  a  simple  voting  method.
Recently,  it  is  clear  that  these  datasets  should  be  com-
bined  to  generate  a  more  comprehensive  understanding 
of  underlying  biology.  With  appropriate  integration  of 
heterogeneous  microarray  data  in  GEO  into  the  stand-
ard-based  database,  improvement  of  analysis  results 
and  comparison  of  data  from  different  experiments  can 

Standard-based  Integration  of  Heterogeneous  Large-scale  DNA  Microarray  Data  for  Improving  Reusability    27

Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D760-765.

Inform.  37,  30-42.

Boyle,  J.  (2005).  Gene-Expression  Omnibus  integration  and 
in  SeqExpress.  Bioinformatics  21, 

tools 

clustering 
2550-2551.

Miotto,  O.,  Tan,  T.W.,  and  Brusic,  V.  (2005).  Supporting  the 
text 

curation  of  biological  databases  with 
mining.  Genome Inform.  16,  32-44.

reusable 

Brazma,  A.,  Hingamp,  P.,  Quackenbush,  J.,  Sherlock,  G., 
Spellman,  P.,  Stoeckert,  C.,  Aach,  J.,  Ansorge,  W.,  Ball, 
C.A.,  Causton,  H.C.,  Gaasterland,  T.,  Glenisson,  P., 
Holstege,  F.  C.,  Kim,  I.  F.,  Markowitz,  V.,  Matese,  J.  C., 
Parkinson,  H.,  Robinson,  A.,  Sarkans,  U.,  Schulze- 
Kremer,  S.,  Stewart,  J.,  Taylor,  R.,  Vilo,  J.  and  Vingron, 
M.  (2001).  Minimum  information  about  a  microarray  ex-
periment  (MIAME)-toward  standards  for  microarray  data. 
Nat. Genet.  29,  365-371.

Burgarella,  S.,  Cattaneo,  D.,  Pinciroli,  F.,  and  Masseroli,  M. 
(2005).  MicroGen:  a  MIAME  compliant  web  system  for 
microarray  experiment  information  and  workflow  manage-
ment.  BMC Bioinformatics  6  Suppl  4,  S6.

Butte,  A.J.,  and  Chen,  R.  (2006).  Finding  disease-related 
genomic  experiments  within  an  international  repository: 
first  steps  in  translational  bioinformatics.  AMIA. Annu. 
Symp. Proc.  106-110.

Butte,  A.J.,  and  Kohane,  I.S.  (2006).  Creation  and  im-
plications  of  a  phenome-genome  network.  Nat.  Bio-
technol.  24,  55-62.

Chaussabel,  D.,  and  Sher,  A.  (2002).  Mining  microarray  ex-
pression  data  by  literature  profiling.  Genome Biol.  3, 
RESEARCH0055.

Chen,  D.,  Muller,  H.M.,  and  Sternberg,  P.W. 

(2006). 
Automatic  document  classification  of  biological  literature. 
BMC Bioinformatics  7,  370.

Edgar,  R.,  and  Barrett,  T.  (2006).  NCBI  GEO  standards  and 
for  microarray  data.  Nat.  Biotechnol.  24, 

services 
1471-1472.

Gollub,  J.,  Ball,  C.A.,  Binkley,  G.,  Demeter,  J.,  Finkelstein, 
D.B.,  Hebert,  J.M.,  Hernandez-Boussard,  T.,  Jin,  H., 
Kaloper,  M.,  Matese,  J.C.,  Schroeder,  M.,  Brown,  P.  O., 
Botstein,  D.  and  Sherlock,  G. 
(2003).  The  Stanford 
Microarray  Database:  data  access  and  quality  assess-
ment  tools.  Nucl. Acids Res.  31,  94-96.

Humphreys,  B.L.,  Lindberg,  D.A.,  Schoolman,  H.M.,  and 
Barnett,  G.O.  (1998).  The  Unified  Medical  Language 
System:  an  informatics  research  collaboration.  J. Am. 
Med. Inform. Assoc.  5,  1-11.

Johnson,  S.B.,  Paul,  T.,  and  Khenina,  A.  (1997).  Generic 
database  design  for  patient  management  information. 
Proc.  AMIA. Annu. Fall. Symp.  22-26.

Louie,  B.,  Mork,  P.,  Martin-Sanchez,  F.,  Halevy,  A.,  and 
Tarczy-Hornoch,  P.  (2007).  Data  integration  and  genomic 
medicine.  J. Biomed. Inform.  40,  5-16.

Martin-Sanchez,  F.,  Iakovidis,  I.,  Norager,  S.,  Maojo,  V.,  de 
Groen,  P.,  Van  der  Lei,  J.,  Jones,  T.,  Abraham-Fuchs,  K., 
Apweiler,  R.,  Babic,  A.,  Baud,  R.,  Breton,  V.,  Cinquin,  P., 
Doupi,  P.,  Dugas,  M.,  Eils,  R.,  Engelbrecht,R.,  Ghazal,  P., 
Jehenson,  P.,  Kulikowski,  C.,  Lampe,  K.,  De  Moor,  G., 
Orphanoudakis,  S.,  Rossing,  N.,  Sarachan,  B.,  Sousa,  A., 
Spekowius,  G.,  Thireos,  G.,  Zahlmann,  G.,  Zvarova,  J., 
Hermosilla,  I.  and  Vicente,  F.  J.  .  (2004).  Synergy  be-
tween  medical  informatics  and  bioinformatics:  facilitating 
genomic  medicine  for  future  health  care.  J.  Biomed. 

Parkinson,  H.,  Kapushesky,  M.,  Shojatalab,  M.,  Abeyguna-
wardena,  N.,  Coulson,  R.,  Farne,  A.,  Holloway,  E., 
Kolesnykov,  N.,  Lilja,  P.,  Lukk,  M.,  Mani,  R.,  Rayner,  T., 
Sharma,  A.,  William,  E.,  Sarkans,  U.  and  Brazma,  A. 
(2007).  ArrayExpress--a  public  database  of  microarray 
experiments  and  gene  expression  profiles.  Nucl. Acids 
Res.  35,  D747-750.

Perou,  C.M.  (2001).  Show  me  the  data!  Nat. Genet.  29, 

373.

Quackenbush,  J.  (2002).  Microarray  data  normalization  and 

transformation.  Nat. Genet.  32  Suppl,  496-501.

Rayner,  T.F.,  Rocca-Serra,  P.,  Spellman,  P.T.,  Causton, 
H.C.,  Farne,  A.,  Holloway,  E.,  Irizarry,  R.A.,  Liu,  J.,  Maier, 
D.S.,  Miller,  M.,  Petersen,  K.,  Quackenbush,  J.,  Sherlock, 
G.,  Stoeckert,  C.  J.,  Jr.,  White,  J.,  Whetzel,  P.  L., 
Wymore,  F.,  Parkinson,  H.,  Sarkans,  U.,  Ball,  C.  A.  and 
Brazma,  A.  (2006).  A  simple  spreadsheet-based,  MIAME- 
supportive  format  for  microarray  data:  MAGE-TAB.  BMC 
Bioinformatics  7,  489.

Sean,  D.,  and  Meltzer,  P.S.  (2007).  GEOquery:  a  bridge  be-
(GEO)  and 

the  Gene  Expression  Omnibus 

tween 
BioConductor.  Bioinformatics  23,  1846-1847.

Spellman,  P.T.,  Miller,  M.,  Stewart,  J.,  Troup,  C.,  Sarkans, 
U.,  Chervitz,  S.,  Bernhart,  D.,  Sherlock,  G.,  Ball,  C., 
Lepage,  M.,  Swiatek,  M.,  Marks,  W.  L.,  Goncalves,  J., 
Markel,  S.,  Iordan,  D.,  Shojatalab,  M.,  Pizarro,  A.,  White, 
J.,  Hubley,  R.,  Deutsch,  E.,  Senger,  M.,  Aronow,  B.  J., 
Robinson,  A.,  Bassett,  D.,  Stoeckert,  C.  J.,  Jr.  and 
Brazma,  A.  (2002).  Design  and  implementation  of  micro-
array  gene  expression  markup  language  (MAGE-ML). 
Genome Biol.  3,  RESEARCH0046.

The  Microarray  Gene  Expression  Data  (MGED)  society.  The 
MIAME  checklist  [http://www.mged.org/Workgroups/MIAME/ 
miame_checklist.html]

Vita,  R.,  Vaughan,  K.,  Zarebski,  L.,  Salimi,  N.,  Fleri,  W., 
Grey,  H.,  Sathiamurthy,  M.,  Mokili,  J.,  Bui,  H.H.,  Bourne, 
P.E.,  Ponomarenko,  J.,  de  Castro,  R.,  Jr.,  Chan,  R.  K., 
Sidney,  J.,  Wilson,  S.  S.,  Stewart,  S.,  Way,  S.,  Peters,  B. 
and  Sette,  A. 
(2006).  Curation  of  complex,  con-
text-dependent  immunological  data.  BMC Bioinformatics 
7,  341.

Wheeler,  D.L.,  Barrett,  T.,  Benson,  D.A.,  Bryant,  S.H., 
Canese,  K.,  Chetvernin,  V.,  Church,  D.M.,  DiCuccio,  M., 
Edgar,  R.,  Federhen,  S.,  Geer,  L.  Y.,  Kapustin,  Y., 
Khovayko,  O.,  Landsman,  D.,  Lipman,  D.  J.,  Madden,  T. 
L.,  Maglott,  D.  R.,  Ostell,  J.,  Miller,  V.,  Pruitt,  K.  D., 
Schuler,  G.  D.,  Sequeira,  E.,  Sherry,  S.  T.,  Sirotkin,  K., 
Souvorov,  A.,  Starchenko,  G.,  Tatusov,  R.  L.,  Tatusova, 
T.  A.,  Wagner,  L.  and  Yaschenko,  E.  (2007).  Database 
resources  of 
for  Biotechnology 
Information.  Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D5-12.

the  National  Center 

Yoon,  S.,  Yang,  Y.,  Choi,  J.,  and  Seong,  J.  (2006).  Large 
scale  data  mining  approach  for  gene-specific  stand-
ardization  of  microarray  gene  expression  data.  Bioinfor-
matics  22,  2898-2904.

