M IN I R E V IE W

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  161-165,  December  2008

Personal  Genomics,  Bioinformatics,  and  Variomics

Jong  Bhak1,  Ho  Ghang1,  Rohit  Reja1  and 
Sangsoo  Kim2*

DNA  Sequencing

1KOBIC  (Korean  Bioinformation  Center),  KRIBB,  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea,  2Department  of  Bioinformatics,  Soong-
sil  University,  Seoul  156-743,  Korea

Abstract

review 

introduces 

In  2008  at  least  five  complete  genome  sequences  are 
available.  It  is  known  that  there  are  over  15,000,000  ge-
netic  variants,  called  SNPs,  in  the  dbSNP  database.  The 
cost  of  full  genome  sequencing  in  2009  is  claimed  to  be 
less  than  $5000  USD.  The  genomics  era  has  arrived  in 
2008.  This 
technologies,  bio-
informatics,  genomics  visions,  and  variomics  projects. 
Variomics  is  the  study  of  the  total  genetic  variation  in  an 
individual  and  populations.  Research  on  genetic  varia-
tion  is  the  most  valuable  among  many  genomics  re-
search  branches.  Genomics  and  variomics  projects  will 
change  biology  and  the  society  so  dramatically  that  bi-
ology  will  become  an  everyday  technology  like  personal 
computers  and  the  internet.  'BioRevolution'  is  the  term 
that  can  adequately  describe  this  change.

Keywords:  personal  genomics,  bioinformatics,  variomics

Introduction

Since  the  launch  of  the  Human  Genome  Project  (HGP) 
in  1990  by  NIH  of  USA,  researchers  have  been  develop-
ing  faster  DNA  sequencers  (Chan,  2005;  Gupta,  2008; 
Mardis,  2008;  Metzker,  2005;  Shendure  et al.,  2004). 
HGP  has  been  said  to  be  led  by  James  Watson  who 
modeled  DNA  in  Cambridge,  UK  in  1953.  In  2003,  the 
International  Human  Genome  Sequencing  Consortium 
held  a  press  conference  to  announce  the  completion  of 
the  human  genome  (IHGSC,  2004).  In  2008,  after  55 
years,  Watson’s  complete  genome  sequence  was  publi-
cized  by  using  454  DNA  sequencers  developed  by  a 
company  rather  than  a  research  institute  (Wheeler et al., 
2008).  In  2007,  Craig  Venter,  a  former  Celera  founder, 
published  his  own  personal  genome  in  PLoS  Biology 
(Levy et al.,  2007).  We  are  entering  the  personalized  bi-
ology  era  with  the  advent  of  next  generation  sequencing 
technologies.

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  sskimb@ssu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-820-0457,  Fax  +82-2-824-4383
Accepted  29  November  2008

The  first  breakthrough  in  genome  sequencing  came  from 
Watson's  colleague,  Fred  Sanger,  in  Cambridge,  UK.  In 
1977,  Sanger  and  his  team  produced  the  first  useful 
DNA  sequencing  method  and  publicized  the  first  com-
plete  genome  (Sanger  et al.,  1977).  It  was  a  tiny  virus 
genome  known  as  phi  X  174.  Soon  after  phi  X  174,  he 
published  the  first  complete  organelle  genome  which 
was  a  mitochondrion  (Anderson  et al.,  1981).  By  1998, 
researchers  in  the  US  evaluated  multiplex  genome  se-
quencing  technologies  and  were  aware  that  one  per-
son's  whole  genome  could  be  sequenced  in  a  day  using 
contemporary  technologies.  George  Church  was  a  Ph.D. 
student  of  Walter  Gilbert  who  received  a  Nobel  Prize 
with  Sanger  for  developing  a  sequencing  method. 
Gilbert's  method  was  not  widely  used.  However,  his  col-
league  Church  continued 
to  develop  sequencing 
methods.  One  of  them  is  based  on  the  Polony  idea 
(Porreca  et  al.,  2006).  This  technology  is  used  by 
KNOME  Inc.,  a  full  genome  sequencing  company.  Along 
with  KNOME,  other  companies,  such  as  Complete 
Genomics,  are  now  producing  DNA  sequences  cheaply 
and  in  an  unprecedented  capacity.  The  speed  of  se-
quencing  is  advancing  many  folds  per  year,  much  faster 
than  the  cycle  of  semiconductor  chips  in  computer 
industries.  Also,  genome  sequencing  technology  is  be-
coming  an  everyday  technology  at  the  level  as  com-
puter  CPUs  are  universally  used.  In  five  years’  time,  ex-
perts  predict  that  everyone  in  developed  nations  will  be 
able  to  have  his  or  her  own  genome  information.  Due  to 
its  far  reaching  consequences  in  medicine,  health,  biol-
ogy,  nanotechnology,  and  information  technology,  DNA 
sequencing  will  become  the  most  important  industrial 
technology  ever  developed  during  the  next  decades.

Personal  Genomics

In  2009,  genome  sequencing  technologies  will  achieve 
one  person's  whole  genome  per  day  in  terms  of  DNA 
fragments  sequenced.  Personal  genomics  is  a  new  term 
that  utilizes  such  fast  sequencers.  In  2008,  the  cost  for 
one  personal  genome  is  less  than  $350,000  USD.  If  the 
cost  goes  down  below  $1,000  USD,  the  impact  of  per-
sonal  genomics  is  predicted  to  be  the  largest  ever  in  bi-
ology  in  common  people's  lives.  Reflecting  this  techno-
logical  advancement  to  society  is  the  PGP  (Personal 
Genome  Project),  a  project  to  sequence  as  many  people 
as  possible  with  lowest  possible  cost  (Church,  2005).  At 

162    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  161-165,  December  2008

thousands  of  samples 

present,  Google,  Inc.  and  the  Church  group  are  working 
together  to  sequence  100,000  people’s  genetic  regions 
of  DNA.  In  Saudi  Arabia,  the  government  is  planning  to 
sequence  100  Arabic  people’s  genome.  In  Europe,  there 
are  various  groups  of  people  and  nations  who  have 
been  genotyping  those  populations.  Iceland  has  been 
especially  successful  in  that  effort  by  utilizing  their 
well-kept  genealogical  data  encompassing  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  people.  In  Asia,  Jeongsun  Seo  of  Seoul 
National  University  has  been  working  on  the  East  Asia 
Genome  Project  during  the  past  several  years.  His 
group  has  collected 
from 
Mongolian  tribes  with  a  extremely  large  genealogical 
tree  among  them  (Park et al.,  2008;  Sung et al.,  2008). 
Seo  is  said  to  be  sequencing  at  least  100  Korean  ge-
nomes  in  collaboration  with  Church  and  Green  Cross, 
Inc.  of  Korea.  The  aim  of  Seo’s  genome  project  is  to 
produce  a  resource  for  East  Asians.  He  is  presently  se-
quencing  at  least  two  Korean  people.  In  China,  Beijing 
Genome  Institute  has  been  successful  in  terms  of 
sequencing.  Their  first  achievement  came  from  a  plant 
genome,  rice.  After  rice,  they  launched  a  100  Han 
Chinese  genome  sequencing  project.  In  Nov.  2008,  they 
published  their  first  Chinese  genome  in  a  journal, 
Nature.  In  Dec.  2008,  another  Korean  group,  Lee  Gilyeo 
Cancer  and  Diabetes 
(LCDI)  and  Korean 
Bioinformation  Center  (KOBIC)  made  a  Korean  genome 
sequence  public.  The  genome  was  sequenced  by 
Solexa  paired-end  sequencer,  and  comparative  ge-
nomics  analyses  and  SNP  data  were  uploaded  as  a 
public  resource.  It  took  only  one  week  to  analyze  the 
7.8x  Korean  genome  using  150  computer  CPUs  to  pro-
duce  mapping  DNA  fragments  to  a  reference  genome, 
generate  new  SNP  information,  compare  that  with  other 
individual  genomes,  and  map  it  with  1600  already 
known  phenotype  information  from  the  public  literature.

Institute 

Genome  Revolution

These  public  genome  data  alongside  previously  known 
Craig  Venter's  and  James  Watson's  mark  that  full  ge-
nome  sequences  are  not  soley  in  academic  domain 
anymore.  Anyone  who  has  money  and  the  will  can  se-
quence  human  genomes.  This  'genomic  revolution'  will 
eventually  lead  to  the  'BioRevolution'  in  terms  of  making 
the  most  essential  human  information  completely  map-
ped  and  publically  available.  This  is  revolutionary,  be-
cause  humans  can  now  engineer  themselves  with  a 
map  or  a  blue  print  not  directly  relying  on  trial  and  error 
style  conventional  evolutionary  methods.  This  indicates 
that  evolution  has  moved  to  a  conscious  level  driving 
evolution.  We  are  in  effect  designing  evolution  using 
computers.

Genomes  and  Personalized  Medicine

The  consequences  of  'BioRevolution'  where  genomic  in-
formation  is  utilized  by  scientists  to  engineers  all  kinds 
of  biological  processes,  including  evolution  itself,  will 
bring  us  personalized  medicine.  The  essence  of  person-
alized  medicine  is  that  enzymes  in  our  tissues,  such  as 
cytochrome  P450,  have  distinct  differences  among  in-
dividuals  and  populations.  Certain  drugs  produce  differ-
ent  responses  in  individuals.

Cytochrome  p450  Family  Example

The  cytochrome  P450  (CYP)  family  of  liver  enzymes  is 
responsible  for  breaking  down  more  than  30  different 
classes  of  drugs  during  Phase  I  of  drug  metabolism. 
Structural  and  SNP  variations  of  the genes  that  code  for 
these  enzymes  can  influence  their  ability  to  metabolize 
certain  drugs.  Based  upon  this,  a  population  can  be 
categorized  into  four  major  types  of  drug  metabolizers: 

   ∙  Extensive  metabolizers:  Individuals  that  can  be  ad-
   ∙  Intermediate  metabolizers:  Individuals  that  metabo-
   ∙  Poor  metabolizers:  Individuals  with  poor  metaboliz-

lize  drugs  with  a  slower  than  normal  rate. 

ministered  with  normal  drug  dosage 

ing  rates.  Drugs  may  accumulate  and  cause  serious 
adverse  effects. 

   ∙ Ultra  metabolizers:  Individuals  with  metabolizing 

rates  even  faster  than  extensive  metabolizers.  They 
may  experience  no  effect  of  drug  activity. 
Ⓡ
 
    In  early  2005,  the  US  FDA  cleared  the  AmpliChip
CYP450  Test,  which  measures  variations  in  two  genes 
of  the  CYP450  enzyme  system:  CYP2D6  and  CYP2C19. 
The  Roche  AmpliChip  CYP450  Test  is  intended  to  iden-
tify  a  patient's  CYP2D6  and  CYP2C19  genotype  from 
genomic  DNA  extracted  from  a  whole  blood  sample. 
Information  about  CYP2D6  and  CYP2C19  genotype  may 
be  used  as  an  aid  to  clinicians  in  determining  ther-
apeutic  strategy  and  treatment  dose  for  therapeutics 
that  are  metabolized  by  the  CYP2D6  or  CYP2C19  gene 
product.

Variomics

The  most  important  scientific  data  out  of  personal  ge-
nomes  are  the  precise  sequence  differences  among 
individuals.  Such  differences  have  many  types.  There 
are  structural  differences  among  chromosomes.  There 
can  be  insertions  and  deletions  of  DNA  segments.  There 
are  certain  fragments  that  appear  as  repeats  in  genom-
es.  Mapping  all  these  structural  genetic  variations  can 
be  briefly  termed  'variomics'.  A  variome  is  the  totality  of 
genetic  variation  found  in  an  individual,  a  population, 

and  a  species.  Among  all  the  variations  we  know,  the 
most  common  is  the  single  nucleotide  polymorphisms 
(SNP).  In  Korea,  mapping  the  variome  has  been  pursued 
relatively  early,  and  there  are  several  groups  who  are 
mapping  the  genetic  variations.  KOBIC  has  several  very 
early  stage,  if  not  the  earliest  in  the  world,  variome  serv-
ers:  http://variome.net  and  http://variomics.net.  Along 
with  SNP  variation,  the  copy  number  variation  (CNV)  is 
also  important.  Some  recent  reports  tell  us  that  CNVs 
can  be  as  variable  as  or  even  more  variable  than  SNPs 
that  are  simple  DNA  base  changes  in  populations. 
Yeun-Jun  Chung  of  the  Catholic  University  of  Korea  has 
been  mapping  CNVs  among  Korean  people  (Kim et al., 
2008).

Human  Variome  Project  (HVP)

As an international collaboration, headed by Richard Cotton, 
HVP  was  launched  in  2006  (http://humanvariomeproject. 
org)  (Ring  et al.,  2006).  HVP  aims  to make  clinicians 
who  have  been  working  on  rare  diseases,  to  work  to-
gether  with  molecular  biologists  and  bioinformaticians. 
Their  goal  is  to  link  medical  information  with  genotype 
information.  Succinctly,  this  process  is  called  genotype 
to  phenotype  mapping.  As  several  full  human  genome 
sequences  are  already  available,  mapping  phenotypes 
to  full  genomes  will  be  the  major  challenge  of  biology 
in  the  next  20  years.

Asian  Variome  Project  (AVP)

Alongside  and  with  the  associations  of  eIMBL,  A-IMBN, 
and  HVP,  a  variome  project  that  is  working  to  map  the 
Asian  population  variome  was  launched  in  2008.  This 
was  a  group  effort  by  Korean  researchers  who  have 
been  interested  in  genome  sequences,  SNPs,  and 
CNVs.  They  have  formed  the  KOrean  VAriome  Consor-
tium  (KOVAC:  http://variome.kr)  and  support  AVP  as  one 
of  the  first  projects.  eIMBL,  the  virtual  laboratory  net-
work  of  Asia  linking  key  biology  groups  modeled  after 
EMBL,  has  acquired  $80,000  USD  in  2008  to  support 
AVP.  eIMBL  aims  to  establish  a  virtual  bioinformatics 
center  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  that  will  link  many  bio-
information  processing  scientists  in  Asia.

Construction  of  Reference  Genomes  for 
the  World

Sanger  Center,  EBI,  NCBI,  and  the  University  of  Wa-
shington  Genome  Center  have  formed  a  consortium  to 
produce  a  reference  genome  (http://referencegenome.org). 
A  reference  standard  is  the  most  important  standard 
among  all  the  standards.  Providing  an  accurate  refer-

Personal  Genomics    163

ence  genome  to  biologists  is  an  important  task.  The  first 
reference  genome  by  the  above  consortium  is  based  on 
Caucasian  genomes.  Due  to  the  extent  of  SNPs  and 
CNVs,  it  is  necessary  to  construct  reference  genomes 
for  diverse  ethnic  groups.  In  Korea,  since  2006,  the  ref-
erence  standard  genome  project  began  and  produced 
the  first  draft  for  Koreans  in  November,  2008,  using  a 
male  donor.  Through  the  bioinformatic  analysis,  the 
Korean  researchers  in  LCDI  and  KOBIC  found  that  there 
was  a  good  justification  for  any  nation  to  launch  large 
scale  genome  projects  to  map  population  diversities. 
Even  such  close  populations  as  Korean  and  the  Chinese 
showed  a  large  quantity  of  SNP  differences.

Bioinformatics 
and  Variomes

for  Personal  Genomes 

Bioinformatics  is  the  key  in  personal  genome  projects 
and  variome  projects.  Bioinformatics  is  not  merely  a  set 
of  tools  but  a  scientific  discipline.  It  regards  life  as  a  gi-
gantic  information  processing  phenomenon  and  works 
to  map  its  components  and  to  model  the  emerging  net-
works  of  the  components.  Bioinformatics  in  2008  is  driv-
ing  biology  into  an  information  science.  Most  biology  re-
search  projects  produce  massive  amounts  of  data  that 
cannot  be  processed  by  hand.  Nearly  all  biological  re-
search  outcomes  in  the  next  five  years  will  have  some 
form  of  high  throughput  data  such  as  genome  se-
quences,  microarray  data,  proteome  analyses,  SNPs, 
epigenome  chips,  and  large  scale  phenotype  mapping. 
Bioinformatics  tools  in  genomics  and  variomics  can  be 
found  from  various  internet  resources.  There  are  several 
bioinformatics  hubs  such  as  NCBI  (National  Center  for 
Biotechnology  Information),  EBI  (European  Bioinforma-
tics  Institute),  DDBJ  (Databank  of  Japan),  and  KOBIC. 
Some  others  are:  Bioinformatics  Organization  (http:// 
Bioinformatics.Org),  EMBnet 
(http://www.embnet.org/), 
and  The  International  Society  for  Computational  Biology 
(http://iscb.org). 
    The  following  are  major  bioinformatics  journals:

   ∙ Algorithms  in  Molecular  Biology  (http://www.almob. 
   ∙ Bioinformatics  (http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/)
   ∙ BMC  Bioinformatics  (http://www.biomedcentral.com/ 
   ∙ Briefings  in  Bioinformatics  (http://bib.oxfordjournals. 
   ∙  Genome  Research (http://genome.cshlp.org/) 
   ∙ Genomics  and  Informatics  (http://www.genominf-
   ∙ The  International  Journal  of  Biostatistics  (http:// 
   ∙ Journal  of  Computational  Biology 

www.bepress.com/ijb/) 

bmcbioinformatics) 

org/) 

org/) 

o.org) 

(http://www. 

164    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  161-165,  December  2008

php?pa=description&journal_id=10) 

liebertpub.com/Products/Product.aspx?pid=31&Asp
xAutoDetectCookieSupport=1) 

   ∙ Cancer  Informatics  (http://www.la-press.com/journal. 
   ∙ Molecular  Systems  Biology  (http://www.nature.com/ 
   ∙ PLoS Computational Biology (http://www.ploscompbiol. 
   ∙ International  Journal  of  Bioinformatics  Research 

org/home.action) 

msb/index.html 

and Applications (http://www.inderscience.com/browse/ 
index.php?journalcode=ijbra) 

Sequencing  DNA,  Metagenomics,  and 
Ecogenomics

Next  generation  sequencing  methods  will  not  only  map 
genomes.  They  will  be  used  to  map  the  environment. 
This  is  called  ecogenomics.  To  humans  the  environment 
can  mean  various  microbial,  plant,  and  animal  inter-
actions  around  us.  Microbial  interaction  is  especially 
critical  to  our  health.  Gut  bacteria  are  a  natural  environ-
ment  within  us.  Metagenomics  is  a  methodology  that 
sequences  the  whole  set  of  microbes  in  our  food  tract. 
Researchers  are  realizing  that  the  human  genome  is 
complemented  by  such  environmental  genomes.  A  new 
term,  'ecogenomics'  is  now  used  to  describe  these 
concepts.  Metagenomics  and  ecogenomics  are  for  map-
ping  the  variations  of  environmental  genetic  factors.

quired  to  link  all  the  genome  information  for  proper 
management  and  utilization.  The  internet  is  the  best  in-
frastructure  for  genome  information  exchange.  Bioinfor-
matics  resources  should  be  available  as  freely  as  possi-
ble  for  all  nations,  including  those  underdeveloped  and 
developing.  Genome  sequencing  and  associated  analy-
ses  should  be  done  freely  in  certain  instances  by  the 
support  of  local  governments  and  international  organi-
zations.  For  maximum  efficiency,  an  adequate  data  and 
information  license  should  also  be  required.  Some  re-
searchers  propose  an  openfree  sharing  of  bioinformatics 
analysis  tools,  as  well  as  the  genome  sequences  (under 
proper  permission).  One  such  movement  is  Free  Geno-
mics  (http://freegenomics.org).
    The  following  are  on-line  genomics  sites:

   ∙  Genomics  portal:  http://genomics.org
   ∙ Personal Genome Project: http://personalgenomes.org
   ∙  openfree  Genomics  Project:  http://personalgenome. 
   ∙ Personal  Genome  sequencing  company:  http://www. 
   ∙ Personal  Genome  SNP  typing:  http://decodeme. 
   ∙ Google’s  Personal  Genome  Typing:  http://23andme. 
   ∙  The  Sanger  Centre:  http://sanger.ac.uk
   ∙  General  Omics  site:  http://omics.org
   ∙  Korean  Genome  Data  Site:  http://koreagenome.org
   ∙  Korean  Bioinformation  Center:  http://kobic.kr

knome.com

com

com

net

Mapping  Expression  using  DNA  Se-
quencing

Conclusion

DNA  sequencing  technologies  were  mostly  used  for 
mapping  genotypes.  However,  they  are  now  used  to 
map  RNA  expression  levels  in  cells.  Cells  produce  vari-
ous  types  of  RNA.  mRNA  is  the  most  abundant  and 
important.  In  the  past,  microarray  and  DNA  chips  were 
used  to  measure  expression  levels.  They  are  not  accu-
rate  and  take  many  bioinformatic  adjustments  before 
producing  reliable  expression  data.  New  sequencing 
technologies  can  measure  expression  levels  much  more 
accurately.  By  sequencing  the  RNAs,  we  can  now  quan-
tify  the  expression  levels  by  precisely  knowing  the  RNA 
sequences.  Sequencing  technologies  will  restructure  the 
expression  analyses  in  the  future.

Linking  Genome  Information  On-line 

Sequencing  a  genome  is  basically  the  production  of  da-
ta,  whereas  analyzing  the  whole  genome  takes  human 
minds  networking  their  hypotheses,  proofs,  and  discov-
eries,  i.e.  genomics  is  a  scientific  endeavor  beyond  me-
chanical  sequencing.  Therefore,  a  worldwide  effort  is  re-

We  have  examined  the  current  trends  in  genomics  and 
variomics.  In  2009  and  onwards,  personal  genome  proj-
ects  will  produce  an  unprecedented  amount  of  bio-
logical  data.  New  bioinformatics  technologies  will  be  re-
quired  to  handle  them.  New  sequencing  technologies 
will  drive  the  next  decades  of  biology  and  transform 
medical  practices.  Fast  sequencing  brought  us  interest-
ing  and  unexpected  applications  such  as  metagenomics 
and  ecogenomics. 

Acknowledgements 

SK  was  supported  by  Soongsil  University  Research 
Fund.  JB,  GH,  and  RR  were  supported  by  KRIBB/ 
KOBIC  fund  from  the  MEST  of  Korea.  The  authors  thank 
Maryana  Bhak  for  editing  the  manuscript.

References

Anderson,  S.,  Bankier,  A.T.,  Barrell,  B.G.,  de  Bruijn,  M.H., 
Coulson,  A.R.,  Drouin,  J.,  Eperon,  I.C.,  Nierlich,  D.P., 

Roe,  B.A.,  Sanger,  F.,  Schreier,  P.H.,  Smith,  A.J.,  Staden, 
R.,  and  Young,  I.G.  (1981).  Sequence  and  organization  of 
the  human  mitochondrial  genome.  Nature  290,  457-465.
Chan,  E.Y.  (2005).  Advances  in  sequencing  technology. 

Mutat. Res.  573,  13-40.

Church,  G.M.  (2005).  The  personal  genome  project.  Mol. 

Syst. Biol.  1,  2005.0030.

Gupta,  P.K.  (2008).  Single-molecule  DNA  sequencing  tech-
nologies  for  future  genomics  research. Trends Biotechnol. 
26,  602-611.

IHGSC.  (2004).  Finishing  the  euchromatic  sequence  of  the 

human  genome.  Nature  431,  931-945.

Kim,  T.M.,  Yim,  S.H.,  and  Chung.  Y.  (2008).  Copy  number 
variations  in  the  human  genome:  potential  source  for  in-
dividual  diversity  and  disease  association  studies.  Geno-
mics & Informatics  6,  1-7.

Levy,  S.,  Sutton,  G.,  Ng,  P.C.,  Feuk,  L.,  Halpern,  A.L., 
Walenz,  B.P.,  Axelrod,  N.,  Huang,  J.,  Kirkness,  E.F., 
Denisov,  G.,  Lin,  Y.,  MacDonald,  J.R.,  Pang,  A.W., 
Shago,  M.,  Stockwell,  T.B.,  Tsiamouri,  A.,  Bafna,  V., 
Bansal,  V.,  Kravitz,  S.A.,  Busam,  D.A.,  Beeson,  K.Y., 
McIntosh,  T.C.,  Remington,  K.A.,  Abril,  J.F.,  Gill,  J., 
Borman,  J.,  Rogers,  Y.H.,  Frazier,  M.E.,  Scherer,  S.W., 
Strausberg,  R.L.,  and  Venter,  J.C.  (2007).  The  diploid  ge-
nome  sequence  of  an  individual  human.  PLoS Biol.  5, 
e254.

Mardis,  E.R.  (2008).  The  impact  of  next-generation  se-
quencing  technology  on  genetics.  Trends  Genet.  24, 
133-141.

Metzker,  M.L. 

(2005).  Emerging 

technologies 

in  DNA 

sequencing.  Genome Res.  15,  1767-1776.

Personal  Genomics    165

Park,  H.S.,  Kim,  J.I.,  Cho,  S.I.,  Sung,  J.H.,  Kim,  H.L.,  Ju, 
Y.S.,  Bayasgalan,  G.,  Lee,  M.K.,  and  Seo,  J.S.  (2008). 
Genome-wide  Linkage  Study  for  Plasma  HDL  Cholesterol 
Level  in  an  Isolated  Population  of  Mongolia. Genomics & 
Informatics  6,  8-13.

Porreca,  G.J.,  Shendure,  J.,  and  Church,  G.M.  (2006). 
Polony  DNA  sequencing. Curr. Protoc. Mol. Biol.  Chapter 
7  Unit  7  8.

Ring,  H.Z.,  Kwok,  P.Y.,  and  Cotton,  R.G.  (2006).  Human 
Variome  Project:  an  international  collaboration  to  cata-
logue  human  genetic  variation.  Pharmacogenomics  7, 
969-972.

Sanger,  F.,  Air,  G.M.,  Barrell,  B.G.,  Brown,  N.L.,  Coulson, 
A.R.,  Fiddes,  C.A.,  Hutchison,  C.A.,  Slocombe,  P.M.,  and 
Smith,  M.  (1977).  Nucleotide  sequence  of  bacteriophage 
phi  X174  DNA.  Nature  265,  687-695.

Shendure,  J.,  Mitra,  R.D.,  Varma,  C.,  and  Church,  G.M. 
(2004).  Advanced  sequencing  technologies:  methods  and 
goals.  Nat. Rev. Genet.  5,  335-344.

Sung,  J.H.,  Lee,  M.K.,  and  Seo,  J.S.  (2008).  Inbreeding  co-
- 

efficients 
isolated  Mongolian  populations 
GENDISCAN  Study.  Genomics & Informatics  6,  14-17.

in 

two 

Wheeler,  D.A.,  Srinivasan,  M.,  Egholm,  M.,  Shen,  Y.,  Chen, 
L.,  McGuire,  A.,  He,  W.,  Chen,  Y.J.,  Makhijani,  V.,  Roth, 
G.T.,  Gomes,  X.,  Tartaro,  K.,  Niazi,  F.,  Turcotte,  C.L., 
Irzyk,  G.P.,  Lupski,  J.R.,  Chinault,  C.,  Song,  X.Z.,  Liu,  Y., 
Yuan,  Y.,  Nazareth,  L.,  Qin,  X.,  Muzny,  D.M.,  Margulies, 
M.,  Weinstock,  G.M.,  Gibbs,  R.A.,  and  Rothberg,  J.M. 
(2008).  The  complete  genome  of  an  individual  by  mas-
sively  parallel  DNA  sequencing.  Nature  452,  872-876.

