Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  4(3) 129-132, September 2006 

GraPT: Genomic InteRpreter about Predictive Toxicology 

Jung  Hoon  Woo1·3,  Yu  Rang  Park\  Yong  Jung\ 
Jihun Kim1 and Ju Han Kim1• 2* 

1Seoul  National  University  Biomedical 
Informatics 
(SNUB!),  2Human  Genome  Research  Institute,  Seoul 
National  University College  of Medicine,  Seoul  11 0-799, 
Korea,  3lnterdisciplinary  Program  in  Bioinformatics,  Seoul 
National  University,  Seoul  151-742,  Korea 

Abstract 
Toxicogenomics  has  recently  emerged  in  the  field  of 
toxicology and the DNA microarray technique has become 
common strategy for predictive toxicology which studies 
molecular mechanism caused by exposure of chemical or 
environmental  stress.  Although  microarray  experiment 
offers extensive genomic information to the researchers, 
yet high dimensional characteristic of the data often makes 
it hard to extract meaningful result. Therefore we developed 
toxicant  enrichment  analysis  similar  to  the  common 
enrichment  approach.  We  also  developed  web-based 
system graPT to enable considerable prediction of toxic 
endpoints of experimental chemical. 

Keywords.  toxicogenomics,  predictive toxicology,  high(cid:173)
dimensional  data,  toxicant  enrichment  analysis,  web(cid:173)
based system, prediction, toxic endpoints 

Introduction 
As genomics technologies have been gradually integrated 
into  conventional  toxicology,  the  new  era  so-called 
toxicogenomicsis emerged in this field of study. Especially 
DNA microarray which explains thousands of transcripts' 
changes  has  become  a  well  established  method  in 
biological research fields. Gene expression is a sensitive 
indicator of toxicant exposure, disease state, and cellular 
metabolism,  and  thus  represents  a  unique  way  of 
characterizing how cells and organisms adapt to changes 
in  external  environment (Lettieri,  2006).  Proponents of 
toxicogenomics aim to apply mRNA expression technology 
to study chemical effects in biological systems (Afshri et 

*Corresponding author: E-mail juhan@snu.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-740-8320, Fax +82-2-742-5947 
Accepted 20 August 2006 

a/.,  1999; Lovet, 2000). 

Predictive toxicology, predicting toxic endpoints caused 
by unknown chemical exposure, has been the main issue 
of conventional study, and accordingly it still is a challenge 
of toxicogenomics  (Laura et at.,  2004).  Comparing  gene 
expression  patterns  generated  by  microarray  between 
model organisms stimulated with toxicant or environmental 
stress  and  control  have  been  widely  used  strategy  for 
prediction oftoxicity of new and existing chemicals (Fielden 
et at., 2001 ). 

However, it is unlikely to get meaningful information 
directly fromhigh-dimensional gene expression data. The 
enrichment  approach  with  cluster analysis  (-apowerful 
technique  for  dimension  reduction)  which  uses  gene 
ontology (GO), and pathway information has emerged as 
a result. The relationship between Gene and toxicant can 
be sources of different kinds of enrichment approach. 

The major purpose of toxicant enrichment analysis is 
to identify biological function of experimental toxicants and 
to  get  vital  information  such  as  prediction  of  toxic 
endpoints.  We developed toxicant enrichment strategy 
and the graPT based on the gene-toxicant relationship in 
order to provide information on the association between 
toxic endpoints and unknown chemicals. 

Methods 
Public toxicogenomics data localization and 
integration 
We localized CTD (Comparative Toxicogenomics Database(cid:173)
http://ctd.mdibl.orgl)  data  and  CHE (http:lldatabase. 
healthandenvironment. orgl) Toxic data used for detemining 
relationship between gene, toxicant, and disease data types. 
We  localized  Entrez  Gene  (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
entrez/), RefSeq (http://wvvw. ncbi.nlm. nih.gov!RefSeq/), and 
MeSH (httpJ!www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/) data for annotating the 
three  data  types  respectively  and  constructed  relational 
database by integrating these data sources (Fig.1 ). 

Toxicant enrichment test 
Frequencies  of toxicant  terms  within  the  dataset  are 
calculated  and  compared  with  reference  frequencies. 
The probability of obtaining by chance a number of k of 
related  genes for given toxicant term among  a dataset 
size n,  knowing that reference dataset contains m such 
related  genes out of N  genes,  is then  calculated.  This 

130  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  4(3) 129-132, September 2006 

. 

I gene 
I 'It  id:  INTEGER 
10 name:  VARCHAR 
0  synonym:  TEXT 
I 0  seq  id:  TEXT 

. 

I qene  chem  reference 
'iJ  gene_id: INTEGER  (FK) 
'\1  chern  id:  INTEGER  (FK) 
<>  refererence:  TEXT 
:a ref&ence_has_gene_FKindex2 
:a ref&ence_has_gene_FKlndex3 

'11  gene_jd 

'11  chem  id 

. 

chem  graph 
'tfctiNTEGER 
'\t  chern_jdchem2:  INTEGER 
'\t  chern  id:  INTEGER  (FK)  --
o  distance:  INTEGER 
f.4  chem_graph_FKindexl 

(4 chem_qaph_FKlndex2 

'It  chem  1d 

'It  chemjd 

. 

~ ~ 

chern 
'if  id:  INTEGER 
Q  name:  VARCHAR(256) 
() chemTreeNo:  VARCHAR(SO) 
()  caslnm:  VARCHAR 
<>  eqTerm:  VARCHAR 
0  chemSynonym:  VARCHAR 
0  casRN:  VARCHAR(SO) 
0  description: VARCHAR(4000) 
0  mesh!D:  VARCHAR 

-

. 

disease 
\)  id:  INTEGER 
0  name:  VARCHAR(lOOO) 
0  annotation:  TEXT 
0  scopeNote:  TEXT 
0  meshJD:  VARCHAR 

. 

disease  chern  reference 
'\t  chem_jd:  INTEGER  (FK) 
'if  disease  ld:  INTEGER  (FK) 
o  eviStrength: CHAR(lO) 
0  sideNote:  TEXT 
0  reference:  TEXT 
,4 disease_has_chem_FKindexl 

'{I  disease _id 

,4 disease_has_chem_FKJndex2 

'\1  chem  id 

Fig. 1. Entity-Relationship diagram of database in the graPT. Gene, chemicals (toxicant), and disease are the three data types of the 
grcPT.  Both gene and  disease have respective relationship withchemical.  Information regarding the hierarchy of chemicals is also 
included in the system. 

probability 
follows 
described in  Eq.  (1 ): 

the  hypergeometric  distribution 

threshold about p-value. The ID for genes must contain at 
least one of GenBank accession number, SwissProt ID or 
TrEMBL ID. 

P  {  - k}- (7)(~=;) 
) 
(7

r  x-

-

(1) 

where the random variable X represents the number 
of genes within a given gene subset, related with a given 
toxicant  term.  Because  this  approach  simultaneously 
tests the statistical significances of the associations of a 
set  of genes to  multiple toxicants,  multiple  hypothesis 
testing problems should be considered. We applied FOR 
to offer a  much  reliable  statistical te·sting  (Benjamini  et 
a/., 1995). The percentage of such toxicants selected by 
chance is the FOR, and adjusted P-value threshold was 
decided by determining the FOR (Storey et at.,  2003) 

Input and output 
Input 
A list of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) is produced 
as a common result of DNA microarray experiments. The 
input of operation in graPTis the DEGs list and the cut-off 

Output 
The graPT produces a list of best matching toxicants for 
input DEGs list with statistical significance scores of none 
random association (Fig. 2). Relevant toxicants are listed 
in ascending order of p-values (and adjusted p-value for 
multiple  testing  problems).  Users  are  provided  with 
additional  information  on  the  listed  toxicants.  Inputted 
genes  information  is  hyperlinked  to  an  automated 
annotation page provided by NCB I gene centric database, 
Entrez Gene. 

Application 
Our first application was the data set by Kharasch et at. 
(2006).  These  data  were  collected  for the  purpose  of 
identifying genes related in nephrotoxicity from haloalkene 
fluoromethyl-2,2-difluoro-1-(trifluoromethyl)-vinyl ether 
(FDVE).  They  performed  t-test  to  select  differentially 
expressed genes according to the significance assigned 
at p-value<0.05. We applied toxicant enrichment analysis 
to the 12 DEGs to find out significantly enriched toxicants 

GraPT:  Genomic lntepreter About Predictive Toxicology 

131 

Input page 

yraPTt& 

'ieratioc 

yraPTt~ 

Result page 

r=.=--=- ~-~-_:_~=--~=- ~----=~== -~--~-~-j!i!¥itJ.!Ll!J~~lt_~~--=--=--==-===~=--:-,:=-] 

GeneE>tprmslonPrufilingofNHphrotoxicltylromtheSifYllflurane 

- Entrez Gene 

2e-<l5 
3e-<l5 
3e-{)5 
5e-C6 

,.,_,. 

2114 
2113 
2117 
?/17 

Basic Chemical (toxicant) Information 

Input gene information 

Significant toxicant information 

Fig.  2.  graPT user interface.  Users determine the differentially expressed genes and threshold of scoring test in  the input page. 
Output  of operation  is  a  list  of toxicants  sorted  by  p-value.  graPT provides  summary information  for  listed  significant toxicants 
through its internal annotating system. Users are offered with external link for the information of input genes through the NCBI gene 
centric database,  Entrez Gene. 

-through genomic information. Significance was assigned 
at a minimum 2 identified nodes among mapped genes per 
each toxicant and p-value<0.001. Second application was 
the  data  set  generated  by  Thukral  et a/.  (2005).  They 

selected 9 DEGs with biomarkers of nephrotoxicity and like 
the preceding we tested the DEGs with graPT. 8 and 10 
toxicants  each  were  significantly  enriched  with  two 
experimental data sets (Table 1 ). 

Table 1.  Result of toxicant enrichment analysis using DEGs sets generated by previous studies 

Thukral  eta!. 

DE Gsa 

GAPDH, CFTR2, KIM, RGN, TNF,  HNMT, 
SPP1  , HSP70 1B, CLU,  SCF21m1, CRFG, 
Hspa1a 

GST-pi 2,  Slc21a1, Slc22a2, Slc21a7 
Osteopontin, Kim1, Timp1,  Regucalcin,  C8 

tcdA protein, Clostridium difficile, Carbamates 
Hyaluronic Acid,  Kainic Acid, sodium arsenite, 
geldanamycin 
Antihypertensive Agents,  Hypoglycemic Agents 
Procainamide, Sulfobromophthalein, estrone sulfate, 
Quinidine, Cadmium Chloride,  Leukotriene C4, 
Testosterone 
Acetaminophen, Taurocholic Acid, Choline 

a Indicates that differentially expressed genes are selected by author's own criterion. 
b Indicates selected toxicants by two criteria;  hypergeometric p value <0.001  and number of identified nodes>= 2 

132  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  4(3) 129-132, September 2006 

Discussion 

The common toxicogenomics microarray analysis generates 
set of genes stimulated by the experimental chemical. The 
graPTitself does not perform any statistical test for selecting 
differentially expressed genes so that the users should select 
them by their own  statistical  criterion.  There is no unique 
standard of scoring and selecting genes-set, several kinds of 
trials are required to produce best result in graPT. 

Thrrugh perforning statistical test based on hypergeometric 
distribution, this system permits the automatic ranking of all 
toxicant terms, as well as the evaluation of the significance 
of their occurrence within the dataset. We applied the data 
sets  from  previous  nephrotoxicity  related  studies,  and 
observed that significantly enriched toxicants were partly 
related to nephrotoxicity. Our result suggests that if high 
ranked  toxicants  show  relationship  with  experimental 
chemical based on the genomic information, researcher can 
predict toxic endpoints of unknown chemicals more effectively. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported by a grant from Korea Health 21 
R&D Project, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Republic of 
Korea (0412-MI01-0416-0002). J. W. andY. J's research 
activity  is  partly  supported  by  a  grant from  the  TGRC 
project,  Korea Food &  Drug Administration,  Republic of 
Korea. 

Reference 

Afshari.  C.A.,  Nuwaysir,  E.F.,  and  Barrett,  J.C.  (1999). 
Application of complementary DNA microarray technology 
to carcinogen identification, toxicology, and drug safety 

evaluation.  Cancer Res.  59, 4750-4760. 

Benjamini,Y.  and  Hochberg,Y.  (1995).  Controlling the false 
discovery  rate:  a  practical  and  powerful  approach  to 
multiple testing.  J.  Statist. Soc.  57,  289-300. 

Fielden, M.R. and  Zacharewski, T.R. (2001 ).Challenges and 
limitation of genen expression profiling in mechanistic and 
predictive toxicology.  Toxicological Sciences 60,  6-10. 
Hamadeh, H.K., Amin, R.P., Paules, R.S., and Afshari, C.A. 
(2002). An overview of toxicogenomics. Curr.  Issues Mol. 
Bioi.  4,  45-56. 

Kharasch, E.D., Schroeder, J.L., Bammler, T., Beyer, R., and 
Srinouanprachanh, S.  (2006). Gene Expression Profiling 
of  Nephrotoxicity  from  the  Sevoflurane  Degradation 
Product Fluoromethyl-2,2-difluoro-1-(trifluoro-methyl) vinyl 
Ether ("Compound A") in Rats.  Toxicol.  Sci. 90, 419-431. 
Laura, S., Lee, E.B., and Eric, B.W. (2004). Toxicogenomics 
in Predictive Toxicology in Drug Development. Chemistry 
and Biology 11,  161-171. 

Lettieri, T.  (2006).Recent Applications of DNA Microarray 
Technology toT oxioology and  Eootoxioololgy. Environmental 
Health Perspective 114, 4-9. 

Lovett, R.A.  (2000). Toxicogenomics. Toxicogists brace for 

genomics revolution.  Science 289, 536-537. 

Mattingly,  C.J.,  Colby,  G.T.,  Forrest,  J.N.,  and  Boyer,  J.L. 
(2003).  The  Comparative  Toxicogenomics  Database 
(CTD). Environ Health Perspect 111, 793-795. 

Storey, J.D. and Tibshirani, R.  (2003). Statistical significance 
for genome wide studies. Proc. Nat/. Acad. Sci.  USA 100, 
9440-9445. 

Thukral, S.K., Nardone, P.J., Hu, R., Sullivan, L.,  Galambos, 
E., Fitzpatrick, V.D., Healy, L., Bass, M.B., Cosenza, M.E., 
and  Afshari,  C.A.  (2005).  Prediction  of Nephrotoxicant 
Action  and  Identification of Candidate Toxicity-Related 
Biomarkers.  Toxicol.  Pathol.  33,  343-355. 

