A PPLIC A TIO N

N O TES

Genomics  &  Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 83-87, June 2007

A DNA Microarray LIMS System for Integral Genomic 
Analysis of Multi-Platform Microarrays

Mi Kyung Cho2, Jason Jongho Kang1 and Hyun Seok 
Park1,2*

Keywords: dna chip, molecular diagnosis, data warehouse, 
LIMS

1Institute of Bioinformatics, Macrogen Inc., Seoul 153-023, 
Korea, 2Department of Computer Science, Ewha Womans 
University, Seoul 120-750, Korea
7)
Abstract
The analysis of DNA microarray data is a rapidly evolving area 
of  bioinformatics,  and  various  types  of  microarray  are 
emerging as some of the most exciting technologies for use in 
biological and clinical research. In recent years, microarray 
technology has been utilized in various applications such as the 
profiling  of  mRNAs,  assessment  of  DNA  copy  number, 
genotyping, and detection of methylated sequences. However, 
the analysis of these heterogeneous microarray platform 
experiments  does  not  need  to  be  performed  separately. 
Rather, these platforms can be co-analyzed in combination, 
for cross-validation. There are a number of separate laboratory 
information management systems (LIMS) that individually 
address some of the needs for each platform. However, to our 
knowledge there are no unified LIMS systems capable of 
organizing  all  of  the  information  regarding  multi-platform 
microarray experiments, while additionally integrating this 
information with tools to perform the analysis.

In order to address these requirements, we developed 
a web-based LIMS system that provides an integrated 
framework for storing and analyzing microarray information 
generated by the various platforms. This system enables 
an easy integration of modules that transform, analyze 
and/or visualize multi-platform microarray data.

Availability: The website for the system can be accessed at 
the following web address; http://dnachip.macrogen.co.kr/. 
The LIMS system was originally built to support the DNA 
Microarray System Development Center for Diagnostic and 
Prognostic Application to Genetic and Acquired Diseases, 
supported by the Ministry of Health & Welfare of Korea. 
Academic users who want to use the system described here 
should contact us via http://cafe.naver.com/dnachip.cafe/ 
to attain access privileges.

*Corresponding author: E-mail hspark@macrogen.com, neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel +82-2-2113-7007, Fax +82-2-2113-7016
Accepted 2 April 2007

DNA Microarray System Development Center 
for Diagnostic and Prognostic Application to 
Genetic and Acquired Diseases
Our multi-platform microarray LIMS system was originally 
designed to support the DNA Microarray System Development 
Center for Diagnostic and Prognostic Application to Genetic 
and Acquired Diseases. The aim of the center, during the first 
phase of the project, was to validate eighteen prototype 
multi-platform microarrays for their potential clinical and 
diagnostic application. In the second phase of the project, 
which will be completed by the year 2010, studies are aimed 
at developing at least three diagnostic microarrays and/or 
commercially viable biomarkers. During this period, a vast 
amount of microarray data will be stored in our LIMS, in 
collaboration with five genome research centers of Korea; 
The Genome Research Center for Reproductive Medicine and 
Infertility, The Genome Research Center for Gastroenterology, 
The Skin Diseases Genome Research Center, The Genome 
Research Center for Lung and Breast/Ovarian Centers, 
The Genome Research Center for Cardiovascular Disease. 
It goes without saying that data-mining a logical set of 
microarray data of this magnitude will require a robust 
informatics system incorporating powerful analytical and 
visualization tools. To this end, we have designed an 
integral multi-platform microarray LIMS, which integrates 
biomaterial information, raw images, and extracted data. 
Our  system  is  compatible  with  most  types  of  array 
experiments and data formats.

Dealing with Multi-platform Microarrays 
Data
A variety of studies have emerged which measure total 
chromosomal  copy  number  variations  (CNV),  single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array data, expression 
profiles  or  methylation  data,  at  an  increasingly  high 
resolution. Comparative and multi-platform analyses need 
not be hampered by the use of heterogeneous platforms; 
rather, we may need to combine the results of heterogeneous 
platforms to generate better bioinformatics analyses. For 

84 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 84-87, June 2007

Fig. 1. Microarray technology has been utilized in various applications such as the profiling of mRNA, assessment of DNA
copy number, genotyping, and detection of methylated sequences. The results of various platform experiments can be 
analyzed together for comprehensive analyses and cross validation.

example, we may need to develop a procedure that is 
capable of extracting both copy number and allele type 
information from SNP array data. This information could 
be used to derive allele-specific copy number across the 
whole  genome,  in  order  to  visualize  not  only  where 
amplifications and deletions occur, but also the haplotype 
of the region being amplified or deleted. A recent study 
shows that copy number data retrieved from either array 
comparative genome hybridization (CGH) or SNP arrays 
are comparable, and that the integration of genome-wide 
loss of heterozygousity (LOH), copy number and gene 
expression data is useful for the identification of gene 
specific targets (Judith et al., 2007). Other studies have 
shown an integrated genomic analysis using expression 
profiling and array-based CGH (Remco et al., 2007). It has 
also been reported that cross-platform classification of 
heterogeneous multi-platform microarray data sets yields 
discriminative gene expression signatures which can be 
detected and validated by a large number of microarray 
samples (Patrick et al., 2005; Mitchell et al., 2004). Artificial 
neural  networks  (ANNs)  have  also  been  successfully 
applied to two completely different microarray platforms 
(cDNA and oligonucleotide) (Bloom et al., 2004). In fact, 
predictive models generated by training heterogeneous 
microarray platforms can be better validated than those 
generated on a single data set, while displaying high 

including 

predictive power and improved generalization performance. 
A comparison between array CGH, expression profiling and 
SNP arrays reveals that the overall concordance in detection 
was relatively high. Currently, our LIMS system is capable of 
dealing  with  various  platforms 
Illumina® 
GoldenGate  Assay,  Illumina  Sentrix®  HumanRef-8 
Expression BeadChip, Array CGH: MacArray™ Karyo 4000, 
MacArray™ M-chip, GeneChip® Human Mapping 500K 
Array, CodeLink™ Human Whole Genome Bioarray, and 
Agilent Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray Kit (44K).
Figure 2 shows one of our exemplary research results, 
which was produced in collaboration with The Genome 
Research  Center  for  Gastroenterology.  Using  various 
algorithms and visualization tools that we have developed 
with our LIMS, nine common genes could be selected from 
195 candidate SNPs, 144 clones from array CGH and 263 
genes from expression profiles for distinguishing normal 
liver, chronic hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

SNP chips, GoldenGateTM Assay Procedures
In an attempt to identify the normal liver, chronic hepatitis, 
and  hepatocellular  carcinoma  risk  conferred  by  SNP 
interactions, we studied 1,536 SNPs from a selection of 114 
significant genes involved in major cancer-related liver 
disease. For the current study, we selected samples from 

A DNA Microarray LIMS System for Integral Genomic Analysis of Multi-Platform Microarrays 85

Fig. 2. An exemplary case of multi-platform analysis: nine common genes were selected from SNP, array CGH & expression profiles
representing normal liver, chronic hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

459 patients who presented with various stages of liver 
disease.  All  SNPs  were  genotyped  using  Illumina’s 
GoldenGateTM  assay.  The  association  between  the 
case-control status and each individual SNP, measured by 
the  odds  ratio  and  its  corresponding  95%  confidence 
interval, was estimated using unconditional logistic regression 
models. The robustness of the interactions, which were 
observed among the selected SNPs with stronger functional 
evidence, was assessed using a correction for multiple 
testing based on the false discovery rate (FDR) principle. Of 
the SNPs, 195 (67 genes) contributed to chronic hepatitis 
disease states and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma 
individually.

arrayCGH
Bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones were 
selected  from  Macrogen’s  proprietary  BAC  library 
(http://www.macrogen.com). Briefly, pECBAC1 (Friijter et 
al. 1997) was restricted using the HindIII endonuclease, 
and HindIII-digested pooled male DNA selected by size, 
was used to generate a BAC library. The clones were first 
selected using bioinformatic techniques to give an average 
genomic  coverage  of  2  Mb.  All  of  the  clones  were  two 
end-sequenced using Applied Biosystems 3700 sequencers, 
and  their  sequences  were  analyzed  using  BLAST  and 
mapped according to their positions on the UCSC human 
genome database (http://www.genome. uscs.edu). Con- 
firmation of locus specificity of the chosen clones was 
performed by removing multiple loci binding clones by 
individual examination under a standard FISH condition as 

previously described. These clones were prepared using 
a conventional alkaline lysis method to obtain BAC DNA. 
Each BAC clone was represented on an array as spots in 
triplicate and each array was pre-scanned using an Axon 
scanner to ensure proper spot morphology. The array used 
in this study consisted of 4,040 human BACs, which were 
spaced approximately at 2.3Mb across the whole genome. 
Chromosomal aberrations were categorized as a gain 
when the normalized log2 transformed fluorescent ratio 
was higher than 0.25 and as a loss when this ratio was below 
-0.25. These two threshold values were chosen empirically 
by selecting a 3X standard deviation value calculated from 
30 normal male and normal female hybridization experiments. 
Macrogen's MAC viewer, aCGH analysis software, MS 
Excel VBA, and avadis3.3 Prophetic software was used for 
graphical illustration and image analysis of array CGH 
data.

For  this  study,  we  selected  samples  from  patients 
presenting with the various types of liver disease. For 
calling gains and losses in array CGH data, the Fisher’s 
exact test in R software was used with a False Discovery 
Rate (FDR) <0.05. Chi-square analysis was applied to the 
generated tables to test for a significant difference in the 
distribution of loss or gain vs. no change between groups 
(normal  liver,  chronic  hepatitis,  and  hepatocellular 
carcinoma). Using this method we detected 144 significant 
clones (83 genes).

Gene expression profiling
According to the manufacturer’s instructions, 750 ng of 

86 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 84-87, June 2007

labeled cRNA from each sample was hybridized to each 
Sentrix HumanRef-8 Expression BeadChip for 16-18 h at 
58°C (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA). Detection of the array 
signal  was  performed  using  Amersham 
fluorolink 
streptavidin-Cy3  (GE  Healthcare  Bio-Sciences,  Little 
Chalfont, UK) by the method described in the BeadChip 
manual. Arrays were scanned with an Illumina Bead array 
Reader confocal scanner according to the manufacturer's 
instructions.  Array  data  processing  and  analysis  was 
performed using Illumina BeadStudio software. A whole 
genome  expression  study  was  performed  to  analyze 
differential gene expression profiles. The 63 samples were 
designated as normal liver, chronic hepatitis disease, or 
hepatocellular carcinoma. As a result of replication,  we 
achieved  a  high  accuracy  of  gene  expression  and  a 
reduced error rate (correlation=0.98). A total of 19,091 
probes were normalized by the quantile normalization 
method  for  use  in  the  analysis.  One-way  analysis  of 
variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s HSD test were applied to 
determine differentially expressed sets of genes across the 
three  experimental  groups.  Statistical  significance  was 
adjusted  by  applying  the  Benjamini-  Hochberg  FDR 
multiple-testing correction method. We selected 1,950 
probes with significant differential expression patterns 

for further analyses. By comparing the commonly affected 
genes with the three independently identified genes, we 
have identified 11 genes that showed a high correlation 
with liver disease progression and cancer formation.

the  user 

System Architecture
The software used in this study was developed on the 
GNU/Unix operating system using the JAVA programming 
language  (http://java.sun.com/).  Data  was  stored  in  a 
related database (Oracle 9i) and communicated to the user 
via the Apache Webserver (http://www.apache.org/). When 
required, 
interface  utilizes  Perl  software 
(http://www.perl.org/), and C++ software can be used for 
the more computationally intensive tasks on the server. 
The system follows MIAME guidelines, a set of minimal 
annotation rules for microarray-based experiments (Brazma 
et al., 2001). In our system, data can be visualized at several 
stages of analysis. Unmodified and transformed data sets 
can be plotted interactively as scatter plots, displayed in 
histograms, or viewed as tables (Fig. 3). Entire experiments 
can be displayed in various overview plots, and figures can 
be exported for publication. We have implemented the 

Fig. 3. A snapshot of multi-platform microarray LIMS interfaces.

A DNA Microarray LIMS System for Integral Genomic Analysis of Multi-Platform Microarrays 87

within-slide intensity-dependent LOWESS (locally weighted 
scatter plot smoothing) module (Cleveland et al., 1988), and 
the  MDS  (normalization  and  multidimensional  scaling) 
analysis  module  (Kruskal  et  al.,  1978)  to  compute  the 
distance metric between samples.

Acknowledgement

This work was partially supported by a grant from the Ministry 
of Information and Communication of Korea under the grant 
number of ab05, and by the Ministry of Health & Welfare of 
Korea under grant number of A050558. We would like to 
thank Macrogen Inc., DNA Link Inc., Genomic Tree Inc., and 
Digital Genomics Corp for various communications.

References
Benjamini,Y. and Hochberg,Y.(1995).Controlling the False 
Discovery Rate, A Practical and Powerful Approach to 
Multiple Testing. Journal of Royal statistical Soceity Series 
B. 57, 289-300.

Bloom, G., Yang, I.V., Boulware, D., Kwong, K.Y., Coppola, 
D., Eschrich, S., Quackenbush, J., and Yeatman, T.J. (2004). 
Multiplatform, multi-site, microarray-based human tumour 
classification, Am. J. Pathol. 164, 9-16.

Brazma, A., Hingamp, P., Quackenbush, J., Sherlock, G., 
Spellman, P., Stoeckert, C., Aach, J., Ansorge, W., Ball, 

C.A.,  Causton,  H.C.,  Gaasterland,  T.,  Glenisson,  P., 
Holstege, F.C., Kim, I.F., Markowitz, V., Matese, J.C., 
Parkinson, H., Robinson, A., Sarkans, U., Schulze-Kremer, 
S., Stewart, J., Taylor, R., Vilo, J., and Vingron, M. (2001). 
Minimum  Information  about  A  Microarray  Experiment 
(MIAME) - toward  standards  for  microarray  data.  Nat. 
Genet. 29, 365-371.

Cleveland, W.S. and Devlin, S.J. (1988). Locally weighted 
Regression: an approach to regression analysis by local 
fitting. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 83, 596-610.

Dijkman, R., Doorn, R., Szuhai, J., Willemze, R., Vermeer, 
M.H., and Tensen, C. (2007). Gene-expression profiling 
and array-based CGH classify CD4+CD56+ hematodermic 
neoplasm and cutaneous myelomonocytic leukemia as 
distinct disease entities. Blood 109, 1720-1727.

Judith, N., Kloth, J.N., Oosting, J., Wezel, T., Szuhai, K., 
Knijnenburg, J., Gorter, A., Kenter, G.G., Fleuren, G.J., 
and Jordanova, E.S. (2007). Combined array-comparative 
genomic hybridization and single-nucleotide polymorphismloss 
of  heterozygosity  analysis  reveals  complex  genetic 
alterations in cervical cancer. BMC Genomics 8, 53.

Kruskal, J.B. and Wish, M. (1978). Multidimensional Scaling, 

Sage.

Mitchell,  S.A.,  Brown,  K.M.,  Henry,  M.M.,  Mintz,  M., 
Catchpoole, D., LaFleur, B., and Stephan, D.A. (2004). 
Inter-platform  comparability  of  microarrays  in  acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia, BMC Genomics 5, 71.

