Application  Notes 

Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  2(3) 147-148, September 2004 

MitGEN: Single Nucleotide Polymorphism DB Browser for 
Human Mitochondrial Genome 

Hyun Seok Park1•2·*  and Seung Uk Lee1 

11nstitute  of  Bioinformatics,  Macrogen  Inc.,  Seoul 
153-023,  Korea,  2Department  of  Computer  Science, 
Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul  120-75,  Korea 

Abstract 

Recently  completed  mitochondrial  genome  databses 
from public resources provide us with a better understanding 
of  individual  mitochondrial  genomes  for  population 
genomics.  By  determining  the  substitution  rate  of  the 
genomic sequences, it is plausible to derive dates on the 
phylogenetic tree and build a chronology of events in the 
evolution of human species. MitGEN is specially designed 
as a mitochondrial genome browser for analyzing, comparing 
and visualizing single nucleotide polymorphism for human 
rritochondrial genorres betvl.een human races for comparative 
genomics.  It  is a standalone application and  is available 
free for non-commercial work. 

Availability: http://snp.rnacrogen.co.kr 

Keywords:  visualization, mitochondrial genome, bioinforrnatics 

Summary 

The  human  mitochondrial  genome  is  a  closed  circular 
double-strand DNA molecule of 16,569 bp  in  length.  As 
sequences of the public mitochondrial genome increase, 
researchers  infer  diverse  origins  of  human  species  to 
build  evolutionary  trees  through  data  mining  of  large 
scale  SNP  data.  Molecular anthropologists  have  been 
comparing the DNA of living humans of diverse origins to 
build evolutionary trees. This work is useful for researchers 
not only to reveal the secret of human revolutions, but also 
to  identify  associations  between  SNPs.  However,  the 
main  difficulty for an  efficient exploitation  lies in  the fact 
that  there  are  not  many  efficient  visualization  tools 
developed so far. Consequently, there is a strong need for 
a  user-friendly system allowing the  user to  handle and 
combine  large  and  diverse  SNP  data  sets  from  the 
different mitochondrial databases. 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail hspark@macrogen.co, 
Tel +82-2-2113-7007, Fax +82-2-2113-701 
Accepted  13 August 2004 

General Features of MitGEN: MitGEN is a mitochondrial 
genome  browser  for  comparing  genomic  variations  of 
individual sequences on a pair-wise format. Version 1.1, 
which  was  released  in  September  2004,  is  the  latest 
version  of  MitGEN  for  Microsoft  Windows  platforms. 
MitGEN provides zooming capabilities, extensive sequence(cid:173)
alignment  capabilities,  and  the  option  of  visualizing 
multiple mitochondrial genomes in the main window. 

The  large  middle  frame  in  figure  1  is  the  main 
Genome Viewer. The 'zoom' icon on the narrow bottom 
frame provides zoomable and scrollable feature display 
down  to  sequence  level  optimized  for  display  of  large 
regions  of  genome  for  moving  within  and  between 
scaffolds  (or fragments)  as  in  the  bottom  left corner of 

Fig. 1. General Features of MitGEN 

figure 1. Users also want to check the evidence for individual 
DNA sequences by inspecting the chromatograms from 
which  the  base  calls  were  deduced.  On  clicking  the 
specific genome area, a pop-up window will be shown to 
display  the  chromatography  along  with  base-calling 
quality values  as  in  the  top  right  corner of figure  1.  To 
click  on  'View  Sequence'  will  display  up  to  1000  bps 
around  the  specified  spot  as  in  the  top  right  corner, 
where the sequences can be  inspected by scrolling the 
bar in  the bottom frame.  To click on  'SNP'  invokes the 
genome  comparison  and  SNP  search  mode  between 
individuals or among races as in figure 2. 

C001Jaring Individual Genomes: It is frequent to compare 
the  standard  Cambridge  data  with  other  mitochondrial 
DNA MitGEN makes it possible to compare two mitochondrial 
genomes  for  comparative  studies.  As  was  previously 
mentioned, clicking on 'SNP' will invoke the SNP search 

148  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(3}  147-148, September 2004 

to 

rather than one. The outer circle represents the standard 
Cambridge data, and the inner circle represents the data 
in comparison. The Genome Browser in figure 2 shows 
that  MitGEN  can  display  not  only  the  completed  g 
enomes but also the fragments  of  partially sequenced 
genomes.  However,  the  individual  genomes  should  be 
pre-aligned  according 
the  Cambridge  Reference 
Sequence before being displayed.  MitGEN provides the 
option  of  displaying  multiple  sequence  alignments 
among the same races or similar groups.  The different 
SNP sites will be displayed in different colors as shown in 
the top corner of figure 2.  Clicking on certain features of 
MitGEN also searches our database for listings of genes 
or  SNP  sites.  Users  can  connect  directly  to  the 
mitochondrial  web  sites  or  databases  for  the  latest 
human mitochondrial annotation. 

Fig. 2. Comparison Mode of MitGEN 

mode between individuals or among races. For example, 
the main window in figure 2 displays two circular genomes 

