R E V IE W

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(4)  165-169,  December  2010

Bioinformatics Resources of the Korean Bioinformation Center 
(KOBIC)

Byungwook  Lee1,  In-Sun  Chu1,  Namshin  Kim1, 
Jinhyuk  Lee1,  Seon-Yong  Kim1,  Wan  Kyu  Kim2 
and  Sanghyuk  Lee1,2*

1Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (KOBIC),  KRIBB,  Dae-
jeon  305-806,  Korea,  2Ewha  Research  Center  for  Sys-
tems  Biology  (ERCSB),  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul 
120-750,  Korea

Abstract

The  Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (KOBIC)  is  a  national 
bioinformatics  research  center  in  Korea.  We  developed 
many  bioinformatics  algorithms  and  applications  to  facil-
itate  the  biological  interpretation  of  OMICS  data.  Here 
we  present  an  introduction  to  major  bioinformatics  re-
sources  of  databases  and  tools  developed  at  KOBIC. 
These  resources  are  classified  into  three  main  fields:  ge-
nome,  proteome,  and  literature.  In  the  genomic  re-
sources,  we  constructed  several  pipelines  for  next  gen-
eration  sequencing  (NGS)  data  processing  and  devel-
oped  analysis  algorithms  and  web-based  database  serv-
ers  including  miRGator,  ESTpass,  and  CleanEST.  We  al-
so  built  integrated  databases  and  servers  for  microarray 
expression data such as MDCDP. As for the proteome da-
ta,  VnD  database,  WDAC,  Localizome,  and  CHARMM_HM 
web  servers  are  available  for  various  purposes.  We  con-
structed  IntoPub  server  and  Patome  database  in  the  lit-
erature  field.  We  continue  constructing  and  maintaining 
the  bioinformatics  infrastructure  and  developing  algori-
thms.

Keywords:  bioinformatics  programs,  databases,  web 
server,  KOBIC

Introduction

The  Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (KOBIC)  is  a  national 
research  center  for  bioinformatics,  founded  in  2001  pre-
viously  called  National  Genome 
Information  Center 
(NGIC).  KOBIC  plays  a  key  role  in  various  bioinformatics 
research  areas  including  genomics,  proteomics,  systems 
biology,  and  personalized  medicine.  We  are  responsible 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  sanghyuk@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8500,  Fax  +82-42-879-8519
Accepted  2  December  2010

for  the  integration  and  management  of  bioresource  and 
biodiversity  information  from  various  research  labs  and 
institutions  across  the  country.  We  also  provide  a  cen-
tralized  data  access  portal  to  promote  data  sharing  and 
utilization  among  research  groups. 
    In  an  effort  to  support  bioinformatics  and  genomics 
research  in  Korea,  we  develop  numerous  bioinformatics 
algorithms  and  applications,  with  emphases  on  i)  next 
generation  sequencing  (NGS),  ii)  systems  bioinformatics, 
iii)  biomedical  informatics,  and  iv)  structural  informatics. 
These  resulting  pipelines  and  knowledgebases  are  pro-
vided  to  biologists  and  bioinformaticians  to  facilitate  the 
biological  interpretation  of  OMICS  data.  In  addition,  we 
actively  participate  in  many  international  collaborative 
projects  for  research  and  education. 
    Here  we  present  bioinformatics  resources  including 
biological  databases  and  tools  constructed  in  KOBIC, 
which  are  tremendously  useful  to  understand  and  proc-
ess  various  biological  data.  All  resources  discussed  are 
available  from  the  KOBIC  home  page  at  www.kobic.re.kr. 
Table  1  provides  an  at-a-glance  summary  of  these 
resources.

Genome  and  Transcriptome

Pipelines  for  NGS  data

NGS  has  led  to  previously  unimaginable  amounts  of 
data.  To  cope  with  the  deluge  of  NGS  data,  we  con-
structed  NGS  analysis  pipelines,  which  can  be  divided 
into  two  major  parts  based  on  the  processing  data 
types:  genome  and  transcriptome.  In  the  genome  pipe-
line,  NGS  read  sequences  were  mapped  to  reference 
genome  and  then  from  the  mapped  reads  we  can  iden-
tify  SNP  and  structural  variations  such  as  Indel,  CNV, 
and  translocations.  The  genome  pipeline  also  has  de 
novo  assembly  pipeline  for  analysis  of  NGS  reads  with 
no  reference  genome.  For  the  transcriptome  research, 
we  constructed  integrated  analysis  pipelines  to  process 
RNA-seq,  epigenome,  and  small  RNA  data  generated 
from  NGS  technology.  The  transcriptome  pipeline  pro-
vides  researchers  with  efficient  ways  to  deal  with  the 
exprimental  transcriptome  data,  allowing  them  to  get  in-
formation  such  as  how  different  alleles  of  a  gene  are 
expressed,  detect  post-transcriptional  mutations  or  iden-
tify  gene  fusions. 

166    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(4)  165-169,  December  2010

Table  1.  A  summary  of  selected  web-based  databases  and  tools  provided  by  the  KOBIC

Resources

NEUMA

miRGator  v2.0
ESTpass

CleanEST

MDCDP

VnD
WDAC

Localizome

Patome

NEUMA

Description

URL

Reference

(Lee,  et al.,  2010)

http://neuma.kobic.re.kr

Accurate  quantification  tool  of  transcriptome  from 
  RNA-Seq  data  by  effective  length  normalization.
Integrated  system  for  functional  investigation  of  microRNAs. http://miRGator.kobic.re.kr
Web-based  server  for  processing  and  annotating  expressed  http://estpass.kobic.re.kr
  sequence  tag  (EST)  sequences.
Database  server  that  classified  dbEST  libraries  and 
  removes  contaminants.
Microarray  database  for  cancer  diagnosis  and  prognosis  to  http://integromics.kobic.re.kr/mdcdp
  provide  information  on  potential  prognostic  or 
  diagnostic  markers.
Structure-centric  database  of  disease-related  SNPs  and  drugs. http://vnd.kobic.re.kr:8080/VnD
Web  server  for  measuring  domain  architecture  similarity  to 
  identify  homolog  of  multidomain  proteins.
Web  server  for  identifying  transmembrane  topologies  and  TM http://localodom.kobic.re.kr/LocaloDom (Lee,  et al.,  2006)
  helices  of  eukaryotic  proteins  utilizing  domain  information.

(Cho,  et al.,  2011)
(Lee,  et al.,  2007)

http://cleanest.kobic.re.kr/

(Lee  and  Shin,  2009)

http://wdac.kr

(Yang,  et al.,  2011)
(Lee  and  Lee,  2009)

CHARMM-HM CHARMM-based  Homology  Model  Builder.
IntoPub

Database  server  to  provide  web  server  information  for 
  processing  biological  data.
Database  server  of  containing  biological  sequence  data 
  disclosed  in  patents  and  published  applications, 
  as  well  as  their  analysis  information.

 
http://psb.kobic.re.kr/charmm-hm
http://into.kobic.re.kr

http://genepatent.kr

(Lee,  et al.,  2007)

NEUMA  (Normalization  by  Expected  Uniquely  Mappable 
Area)  (Lee, et al.,  2010)  is  a  novel,  efficient  and  intuitive 
approach  of  estimating  mRNA  abundances  from  the 
whole  transcriptome  shotgun  sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) 
(Marguerat  and  Bahler,  2010)  data.  NEUMA  is  based  on 
effective  length  normalization  using  uniquely  mappable 
areas  of  gene  and  mRNA  isoform  models.  Using  the 
known  transcriptome  sequence  model  such  as  RefSeq, 
NEUMA  pre-computes  the  numbers  of  all  possible 
gene-wise  and  isoform-wise  informative  reads:  the  for-
mer  being  sequences  mapped  to  all  mRNA  isoforms  of 
a  single  gene  exclusively  and  the  latter  uniquely  map-
ped  to  a  single  mRNA  isoform.  The  results  are  used  to 
estimate  the  effective  length  of  genes  and  transcripts, 
taking  experimental  distributions  of  fragment  size  into 
consideration.  We  propose  that  NEUMA  could  make  a 
standard  method  in  quantifying  gene  transcript  levels 
from  RNA-Seq  data.

miRGator  v2.0

miRGator  v2.0  (Cho, et al.,  2011)  is  an  integrated  data-
base  of  microRNA  (miRNA)-associated  gene  expression, 
target  prediction,  disease  association  and  genomic  an-
notation,  which  aims  to  facilitate  functional  investigation 
of  miRNAs.  The  database  contains  information  about  (i) 
human  miRNA  expression  profiles  under  various  ex-
perimental  conditions,  (ii)  paired  expression  profiles  of 

both  mRNAs  and  miRNAs,  (iii)  gene  expression  profiles 
under  miRNA-perturbation  (e.g.  miRNA  knockout  and 
overexpression),  (iv)  known/predicted  miRNA  targets  and 
(v)  miRNA-disease  associations.  In  total,  ＞8,000  miRNA 
expression  profiles,  ∼300  miRNA-perturbed  gene  ex-
pression  profiles  and  ∼2000  mRNA  expression  profiles 
are  compiled  with  manually  curated  annotations  on  dis-
ease,  tissue  type  and  perturbation.  The  miRGator  serves 
as  a  reference  database  to  investigate  miRNA  ex-
pression  and  function.

ESTpass

ESTpass  (Lee,  et al.,  2007)  is  a  web-based  server  for 
processing  and  annotating  sequence  data  from  ex-
pressed  sequence  tag  (EST)  projects.  ESTpass  accepts 
a  FASTA-formatted  EST  file  and  its  quality  file  as  inputs, 
and  it  then  executes  a  back-end  EST  analysis  pipeline 
consisting  of  three  consecutive  steps.  The  first  is 
cleansing  the  input  EST  sequences.  The  second  is  clus-
tering  and  assembling  the  cleansed  EST  sequences  us-
ing  d2_cluster  (Burke,  et al.,  1999)  and  CAP3  (Huang 
and  Madan,  1999)  programs  and  producing  putative 
transcripts.  From  the  CAP3  output,  ESTpass  detects 
chimeric  EST  sequences  which  are  confirmed  through 
comparison  with  the  nr  database.  The  last  step  is  anno-
tating  the  putative  transcript  sequences  using  RefSeq 
(Pruitt,  et al.,  2007),  InterPro  (Hunter,  et al.,  2009),  GO 
(Barrell, et al.,  2009)  and  KEGG  (Arakawa, et al.,  2005) 
gene  databases  according  to  user-specified  options. 

The  major  advantages  of  ESTpass  are  the  integration  of 
cleansing  and  annotating  processes,  exhaustive  annota-
tion,  and  email  reporting  to  inform  the  user  about  the 
progress  and  to  send  the  analysis  results.

CleanEST

CleanEST  (Lee  and  Shin,  2009)  is  a  database  server  that 
classified  dbEST  (Radeva, et al.,  2008),  the  EST  division 
of  GenBank,  libraries  and  removed  contaminants.  In  the 
CleanEST,  all  dbEST  libraries  were  classified  according 
to  species  and  sequencing  center.  In  addition,  human 
EST  libraries  were  further  classified  by  anatomical  and 
pathological  systems  according  to  eVOC  (Kelso,  et al., 
2003)  ontologies.  For  each  dbEST  library,  we  provide 
two  different  cleansed  sequences:  ‘pre-cleansed’  and 
‘user-cleansed’.  To  generate  pre-cleansed  sequences, 
we  cleansed  sequences  in  dbEST  by  alignment  of  EST 
sequences  against  well-known  contamination  sources: 
UniVec,  Escherichia  coli,  mitochondria  and  chloroplast 
(for  plant).  To  provide  user-cleansed  sequences,  we  built 
an  automatic  user-cleansing  pipeline,  in  which  sequen-
ces  of  a  user-selected  library  are  cleansed  on-the-fly 
according  to  user-selected  options. 

MDCDP

MDCDP  (Microarray  Database  for  Cancer  Diagnosis  and 
Prognosis)  is  a  microarray  database  to  provide  in-
formation  on  potential  prognostic  or  diagnostic  markers 
identified  through  the  integrative  analyses  of  cancer 
gene  expression  datasets.  We  have  collected  publicly 
available  gene  expression  data  sets  encompassing 
about  5,000  samples  in  13  different  tissues  with  clinical 
information  on  patient’s  survival.  Available  information  in 
MDCDP  is  as  follows:  prognostic  information  for  each 
gene,  results  of  differential  gene  expression  analyses, 
results  of  gene  set  enrichment  analyses,  Kaplan-Meier 
survival  analyses  across  cancer  subtypes,  and  heat-
maps  of  expression  levels  for  each  gene.

Proteome

VnD

VnD  (the  variations  and  drugs)  is  a  consolidated  data-
base  containing  information  on  diseases,  related  genes 
and  genetic  variations,  protein  structures  and  drug 
information.  VnD  was  built  in  three  steps.  First,  we  in-
tegrated  various  resources  systematically  to  deduce  cat-
alogs  of  disease-related  genes,  single  nucleotide  poly-
morphisms 
relevant 
drugs.  Next,  we  carried  out  structure  modeling  and 

(SNPs),  protein  mutations  and 

Bioinformatics  Resources  of  KOBIC    167

in 

docking  simulation  for  wild-type  and  mutant  proteins  to 
examine  the  structural  and  functional  consequences  of 
non-synonymous  SNPs 
the  drug-related  genes. 
Finally,  we  investigated  the  structural  and  biochemical 
properties  relevant  to  drug  binding  such  as  the  dis-
tribution  of  SNPs  in  proximal  protein  pockets,  ther-
mo-chemical  stability,  interactions  with  drugs  and  phys-
ico-chemical  properties.  The  VnD  database  would  be  a 
useful  platform  for  researchers  studying  the  underlying 
mechanism  for  association  among  genetic  variations, 
diseases  and  drugs.

WDAC

WDAC  (Weighed  Domain  Architecture  Comparison)  (Lee 
and  Lee,  2009)  is  used  to  identify  homolog  of  multi-
domain  proteins.  The  key  ideas  of  WDAC  are  the  use  of 
weight  scores  for  domain  promiscuity  and  combining 
domain  architecture  comparison  with  sequence  similarity 
method.  WDAC  assigned  a  weight  score  to  Pfam  do-
main  extracted  from  RefSeq  proteins  based  on  its  abun-
dance  and  versatility  to  distinguish  these  promiscuous 
domains  from  conventional  protein  domains.  To  meas-
ure  the  similarity  of  two  domain  architectures,  cosine 
similarity  is  used.  WDAC  combined  sequence  similarity 
with  domain  architecture  comparisons  to  identify  pro-
teins  belonging  to  the  same  domain  architecture.

Localizome

The  Localizome  (Lee,  et al.,  2006)  server  predicts  the 
transmembrane  (TM)  helix  number  and  TM  topology  of 
a  user-supplied  eukaryotic  protein  and  presents  the  re-
sult  as  an  intuitive  graphic  representation.  It  utilizes 
hmmpfam  to  detect  the  presence  of  Pfam  (Finn, et al., 
2010)  domains  and  a  prediction  algorithm,  Phobius  (Kall, 
et al.,  2007),  to  predict  the  TM  helices.  The  results  are 
combined  and  checked  against  the  TM  topology  rules 
stored  in  a  protein  domain  database  called  LocaloDom. 
LocaloDom  is  a  curated  database  that  contains  TM  top-
ologies  and  TM  helix  numbers  of  known  protein 
domains.  It  was  constructed  from  Pfam  domains  com-
bined  with  Swiss-Prot  annotations  and  Phobius 
predictions.  The  Localizome  server  is  a  highly  accurate 
and  comprehensive  information  source  for  subcellular 
localization  for  soluble  proteins  as  well  as  membrane 
proteins.

CHARMM-HM

CHARMM-HM  is  a  web-based  service  dedicated  to  au-
tomated  homology  modeling  based  on  the  CHARMM 
(Chemistry  at  HARvard  Macromolecular  Mechanics) 

168    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(4)  165-169,  December  2010

in  FORTRAN  and 

program.  The  core  module  of  CHARMM-HM  is  a  homol-
ogy  model  builder,  written 
im-
plemented  in  CHARMM.  It  assists  researchers  in  build-
ing  homology  models  using  existing  CHARMM  global 
optimization  methods.  A  user  provides  the  input,  align-
ment  or  sequence,  to  the  web  server,  and  receives  the 
output  via  electronic  mail.  The  generated  structures  and 
their  quality  evaluation  scores  are  kept  on  the  web  serv-
er  for  the  further  analysis.

Literature

IntoPub

IntoPub  (Informatics  tools  in  PubMed)  is  a  web-based 
database  server  to  provide  web  server  information  for 
processing  biological  data.  To  construct  IntoPub,  we 
obtained  abstracts  containing  web  resources  information 
from  the  PubMed  (Sequeira, et al.,  2001)  database  and 
annotated  the  obtained  abstracts  automatically  and 
manually.  This  database  server  provides  information  on 
comprehensive  and  up-to-dated  tools  and  databases 
covering  all  the  biological  fields.  New  web  resources  in-
troduced  by  PubMed  have  been  updated  automatically 
on  IntoPub.

Patome

With  the  advent  of  automated  and  high-throughput  tech-
niques,  the  number  of  patent  applications  containing  bi-
ological  sequences  has  been  increasing  rapidly.  Patome 
(Lee, et al.,  2007)  is  a  database  server,  which  contains 
biological  sequence  data  disclosed  in  patents  and  pub-
lished  applications,  as  well  as  their  analysis  information. 
The  disclosed  sequences  were  annotated  with  RefSeq 
database  and  then  were  linked  to  Entrez  Gene,  OMIM 
and  GO  databases.  From  these  results,  patents  are 
mapped  into  genes.  The  gene?patent  mapping  table  can 
be  used  to  identify  whether  a  particular  gene  or  disease 
is  related  to  patenting.

KOBIC  Computer  Facilities

A  large-scale  computer  system  is  an  essential  compo-
nent  of  bioinformatics  research.  Thus  we  manage 
high-performance  servers,  clusters,  and  storage  for 
building  and  maintaining  KOBIC’s  biological  resources. 
Currently  we  have  high  performance  clusters  with  more 
than  2,000  CPU  cores,  storage  system  of  1,500  TB  for 
large  scale  data,  more  than  250  machines  for  biological 
analysis  and  web  systems,  and  10Gbps  network 
switches  for  high  speed  data  transmission.

Conclusion

The  huge  quantities  of  data  that  are  now  being  gen-
erated  by  life-science  researchers  provide  unforeseen 
challenges  and  opportunities.  The  biological  research 
has  been  fundamentally  changed  by  shifting  towards 
asking  questions  on  a  genome-wide  scale  rather  than 
one  gene  at  a  time.  In  addition,  NGS  methods  are  pro-
viding  the  technology  to  identity  individual  genomes,  to 
quantify  expression,  to  measure  biodiversity  and  to 
study  cancer  differentiation.  To  deal  with  these  sit-
uations,  KOBIC  continue  building  and  maintaining  the 
bioinformatics  infrastructure  and  developing  algorithms.
Most  of  the  resources  described  here  include  doc-
umentation,  other  explanatory  material,  and  references 
to  collaborators  and  data  sources  on  the  respective 
Web  sites.  A  user  support  staff  is  available  to  answer 
question  at  help@kobic.kr

Acknowledgements

The  work  was  supported  by  the  KRIBB  Research 
Initiative  Program.  We  would  like  to  thanks  all  KOBIC 
members  for  developing  and  maintaining  KOBIC  bio-
informatics  resources. 

References

Arakawa,  K.,  Kono,  N.,  Yamada,  Y.,  Mori,  H.,  and  Tomita, 
M.  (2005).  KEGG-based  pathway  visualization  tool  for 
complex  omics  data.  In Silico Biol.  5,  419-423.

Barrell,  D.,  Dimmer,  E.,  Huntley,  R.P.,  Binns,  D., 
O'Donovan,  C.,  and  Apweiler,  R.  (2009).  The  GOA  data-
base  in  2009--an  integrated  Gene  Ontology  Annotation 
resource.  Nucl. Acids Res.  37,  D396-403.

Burke,  J.,  Davison,  D.,  and  Hide,  W.  (1999).  d2_cluster:  a 
full-length 

validated  method 
for  clustering  EST  and 
cDNAsequences.  Genome Res.  9,  1135-1142.

Cho,  S.,  Jun,  Y.,  Lee,  S.,  Choi,  H.S.,  Jung,  S.,  Jang,  Y., 
Park,  C.,  Kim,  S.,  and  Kim,  W.  (2011).  miRGator  v2.0  : 
an 
investigation  of 
microRNAs.  Nucl. Acids Res.  39,  D158-162.

integrated  system 

for 

functional 

Finn,  R.D.,  Mistry,  J.,  Tate,  J.,  Coggill,  P.,  Heger,  A., 
Pollington,  J.E.,  Gavin,  O.L.,  Gunasekaran,  P.,  Ceric,  G., 
Forslund,  K.,  Holm,  L.,  Sonnhammer,  E.L.,  Eddy,  S.R., 
and  Bateman,  A.  (2010).  The  Pfam  protein  families 
database.  Nucl. Acids Res.  38,  D211-222.

Huang,  X.,  and  Madan,  A.  (1999).  CAP3:  A  DNA  sequence 

assembly  program.  Genome Res.  9,  868-877.

Hunter,  S.,  Apweiler,  R.,  Attwood,  T.K.,  Bairoch,  A., 
Bateman,  A.,  Binns,  D.,  Bork,  P.,  Das,  U.,  Daugherty,  L., 
Duquenne,  L.,  Finn,  R.D.,  Gough,  J.,  Haft,  D.,  Hulo,  N., 
Kahn,  D.,  Kelly,  E.,  Laugraud,  A.,  Letunic,  I.,  Lonsdale, 
D.,  Lopez,  R.,  Madera,  M.,  Maslen,  J.,  McAnulla,  C., 
McDowall,  J.,  Mistry,  J.,  Mitchell,  A.,  Mulder,  N.,  Natale, 
D.,  Orengo,  C.,  Quinn,  A.F.,  Selengut,  J.D.,  Sigrist,  C.J., 
Thimma,  M.,  Thomas,  P.D.,  Valentin,  F.,  Wilson,  D.,  Wu, 

Bioinformatics  Resources  of  KOBIC    169

C.H.,  and  Yeats,  C.  (2009).  InterPro:  the  integrative  pro-
tein  signature  database.  Nucl. Acids Res.  37,  D211-215.
Kall,  L.,  Krogh,  A.,  and  Sonnhammer,  E.L.  (2007).  Advanta-
ges  of  combined  transmembrane  topology  and  signal 
peptide  prediction--the  Phobius  web  server.  Nucl. Acids 
Res.  35,  W429-432.

Kelso,  J.,  Visagie,  J.,  Theiler,  G.,  Christoffels,  A.,  Bardien, 
S.,  Smedley,  D.,  Otgaar,  D.,  Greyling,  G.,  Jongeneel, 
C.V.,  McCarthy,  M.I.,  Hide,  T.,  and  Hide,  W.  (2003). 
eVOC:  a  controlled  vocabulary  for  unifying  gene  ex-
pression  data.  Genome Res.  13,  1222-1230.

Lee,  B.,  and  Lee,  D.  (2009).  Protein  comparison  at  the  do-
main  architecture  level. BMC Bioinformatics  10  Suppl  15, 
S5.

Lee,  B.,  and  Shin,  G.  (2009).  CleanEST:  a  database  of 

cleansed  EST  libraries.  Nucl. Acids Res.  37,  D686-689.

Lee,  B.,  Hong,  T.,  Byun,  S.J.,  Woo,  T.,  and  Choi,  Y.J. 
(2007).  ESTpass:  a  web-based  server  for  processing  and 
annotating  expressed  sequence  tag  (EST)  sequences. 
Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  W159-162.

Lee,  B.,  Kim,  T.,  Kim,  S.K.,  Lee,  K.H.,  and  Lee,  D.  (2007). 
Patome:  a  database  server  for  biological  sequence  anno-
tation  and  analysis  in  issued  patents  and  published  pat-
ent  applications.  Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D47-50.

Lee,  S.,  Lee,  B.,  Jang,  I.,  Kim,  S.,  and  Bhak,  J.  (2006). 

Localizome:  a  server  for  identifying  transmembrane  top-
ologies  and  TM  helices  of  eukaryotic  proteins  utilizing 
domain  information.  Nucl. Acids Res.  34,  W99-103.

Lee,  S.,  Seo,  C.H.,  Lim,  B.,  Yang,  J.O.,  Oh,  J.,  Kim,  M., 
Lee,  B.,  and  Kang,  C.  (2010).  Accurate  quantification  of 
transcriptome  from  RNA-Seq  data  by  effective  length 
normalization.  Nucl. Acids Res. 38,  1-10.

Marguerat,  S.,  and  Bahler,  J.  (2010).  RNA-seq:  from  tech-

nology  to  biology.  Cell Mol. Life Sci.  67,  569-579.

Pruitt,  K.D.,  Tatusova,  T.,  and  Maglott,  D.R.  (2007).  NCBI 
reference  sequences  (RefSeq):  a  curated  non-redundant 
sequence  database  of  genomes,  transcripts  and  proteins. 
Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D61-65.

Radeva,  M.,  Hofmann,  T.,  Altenberg,  B.,  Mothes,  H., 
Richter,  K.K.,  Pool-Zobel,  B.,  and  Greulich,  K.O.  (2008). 
The  database  dbEST  correctly  predicts  gene  expression 
in  colon  cancer  patients.  Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol.  9, 
510-515.

Sequeira,  E.,  McEntyre,  J.,  and  Lipman,  D.  (2001).  PubMed 

Central  decentralized.  Nature  410,  740.

Yang,  J.O.,  Oh,  S.,  Ko,  G.,  Park,  S.J.,  Kim,  W.Y.,  Lee,  B., 
and  Lee,  S.  (2011).  VnD:  a  structure-centric  database  of 
disease-related  SNPs  and  drugs.  Nucl. Acids Res. 39, 
D939-944.

