Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  227-230,  December  2008

Computational  Approach  for  Biosynthetic  Engineering  of 
Post-PKS  Tailoring  Enzymes

Ki-Bong  Kim1*  and  Kiejung  Park2

1Department  of  Bioinformatics  Engineering,  Sangmyung 
University,  Cheonan  330-720,  Korea,  2SmallSoft  Co., 
Deajeon  305-728,  Korea

Abstract

Compounds  of  polyketide  origin  possess  a  wealth  of 
pharmacological  effects,  including  antibacterial,  anti-
fungal,  antiparasitic,  anticancer  and  immunosuppressive 
activities.  Many  of  these  compounds  and  their  semi- 
synthetic  derivatives  are  used  today  in  the  clinic.  Most 
of  the  gene  clusters  encoding  commercially  important 
drugs  have  also  been  cloned  and  sequenced  and  their 
biosynthetic  mechanisms  studied  in  great  detail.  The 
area  of  biosynthetic  engineering  of  the  enzymes  involved 
in  polyketide  biosynthesis  has  recently  advanced  and 
been  transferred  into  the  industrial  arena.  In  this  work, 
we  introduce  a  computational  system  to  provide  the 
user  with  a  wealth  of  information  that  can  be  utilized  for 
biosynthetic  engineering  of  enzymes  involved  in  post- 
PKS  tailoring  steps.  Post-PKS  tailoring  steps  are  neces-
sary  to  add  functional  groups  essential  for  the  biological 
activity  and  are  therefore  important  in  polyketide  biosyn-
thesis.

Availability:  The  trial  version  of  this  system  is  available 
via  WWW  at  http://sm.hacklib.com/.

Keywords:  pharmacological  effects,  gene  clusters,  bio-
synthetic  engineering,  post-PKS  tailoring  step

Introduction

Polyketides  are  important  natural  products  exhibiting  an-
tibacterial  (rifamycin),  antifungal  (erythromycin),  antitumor 
(doxorubicin),  immunosuppressant  (FK506)  and  choles-
terol-lowering  activities  (lovastin).  They  are  produced 
mainly  by  Streptomyces  species  which  belong  to  the 
large  group  of  mycelially  growing,  filamentous  bacteria 
from  soil  known  as  actinomycetes.  These  gram-positive, 
fungi-like  bacteria  are  one  of  the  best  known  producers 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  kbkim@smu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-41-550-5377,  Fax  +82-41-550-5184
Accepted  28  October  2008

of  secondary  metabolites  used  as  naturally  occurring 
antibiotics.  Each  core  of  the  polyketide  is  synthesized 
biologically  under  the  control  of  an  exceptionally  large, 
multifunctional  enzyme  called  polyketide  synthase  (PKS), 
in  a  manner  similar  to  that  of  fatty  acid  synthesis,  where 
the  carbon  backbones  of  the  molecules  are  assembled 
by  the  successive  condensation  of  small  acyl  units.
    There  are  presently  three  types  of  polyketides.  Type 
I  modular  polyketides  are  built  up  by  a  PKS  consisting 
of  large  multifunctional  proteins  with  a  different  active 
site  for  each  enzyme-catalyzed  step  in  polyketide  car-
bon  chain  assembly.  Type  II  iterative  polyketides  also 
known  as  aromatic  polyketide  are  normally  synthesized 
by  a  single  PKS  built  up  by  discrete  polypeptides  which 
carry  active  sites  that  are  used  more  than  once  in  the 
biosynthetic  pathway.  Type  III  iterative  polyketides  were 
characterized  not  long  ago  and  the  type  III  PKS  is  a 
member  of  the  chalcone  synthase  (CHS)  and  stilbene 
synthase  (STS)  superfamily  of  PKS  previously  only  found 
in  plants.
    The  readily  synthesized  and  cyclized  polyketide  is 
usually  modified  via  hydroxylation,  glycosylation,  methyl-
ation  and  acylation.  These  tailoring,  or  post  PKS  mod-
ifications  are  believed  to  be  crucial  for  addition  of  im-
portant  functional  groups  to  polyketide  skeletons  and  to 
the  structural  diversity  and  biological  activity  of  this 
class  of  natural  products  (Rix et al.,  2002;  Kwan et al., 
2008).  The  most  frequently  found  post-PKS  modifica-
tions  are  catalyzed  by  oxidoreductases,  a  very  broad 
group  of  enzymes  consisting  of  oxygenases,  oxidases, 
peroxidases,  reductases  (e.g.,  ketoreductases),  and  de-
hydrogenases.  In  general,  these  enzymes  introduce  oxy-
gen-containing  functionalities,  such  as  hydroxyl  groups 
(‘hydroxylases’),  aldehyde  or  keto  groups,  and  epoxides 
(‘epoxidases’)  or  modify  such  functionalities  by  addition 
or  removal  of  hydrogen  atoms,  e.g.  transforming  a  ke-
tone  into  a  secondary  alcohol  or  an  aldehyde  into  a  car-
boxylic  acid.  Although  oxidoreductases  provide  or  mod-
ify  relatively  small  functional  groups,  they  can  have  a 
tremendous  impact  on  the  binding  properties  of  a  mole-
cule  with  respect  to  a  biological  ligand  molecule  (recep-
tor  protein,  enzyme,  DNA  etc.).  The  term  group  trans-
ferase  refers  to  enzymes  that  possess  transferase  activ-
ity  introducing  novel  functional  groups  and  altered  pro-
files  on  the  product  relative  to  the  substrate.  This  en-
zyme  group  contains  important  enzymes  such  as  amino 
transferases,  alkyl  (usually  methyl)  transferases,  acyl 
(usually  acetyl)  transferases,  glycosyltransferases  (GTs) 

228    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  227-230,  December  2008

and  kinases.
    Methyl- and glycosyltransferases are the most important 
post-PKS  modifying  enzymes.  Glycosyltransferases  per-
form  perhaps  the  most  important  biotransformation  on 
earth,  at  least  in  quantitative  terms.  GTs  are  responsible 
for  attachment  of  sugar  moieties,  often  deoxysugars, 
adding  important  features  and  properties  to  a  molecule 
and  they  often  play  an  essential  role  in  the  biological 
activity  of  many  natural  product-based  drugs  (Floss, 
2001;  Mendez et al.,  2001;  Trefzer et al.,  1999;  Xue et 
al.,  2001).  Some  GTs  have  also  shown  to  have  un-
expected  inherent  substrate  flexibility  either  towards 
their  acceptor  substrate  (usually  alcohol  or  phenols)  or 
(deoxy)  sugar  donor  co-substrates,  and  sometimes  even 
to  both  (Faust  et al.,  2000;  Xue  et al.,  2001).  Methyl-
transferases  use  S-adenosylmethionine  (SAM)  as  co-
factor  and  can  methylate  O,  N  or  C-atoms.  O  and 
N-methylations  increase  the  liphophilicity  of  a  molecule 
and  also  remove  hydrogen-bond  donor  sites.  The  meth-
ylation  reactions  can  occur  either  at  the  polyketide  de-
rived  aglycone  moiety  or  on  sugar  residues,  either  prior 
to  or  after  the  glycosyl  transfer  (Rix  et al.,  2001).
    Recent  advances  in  combinatorial  biosynthesis  tech-
nology  have  facilitated  biosynthetic  engineering  of  the 
enzymes  involved  in  polyketide  biosynthesis.  The  area 
of  biosynthetic  engineering  of  the  enzymes  has  emerged 
as  an  important  field  and  been  transferred  into  the  in-
dustrial  arena.  In  this  respect,  we  have  developed  a 
computational  system  to  provide  the  user  with  a  wealth 
of  information  that  can  be  utilized  for  biosynthetic  en-
gineering  of  enzymes,  especially  involved  in  post-PKS 
tailoring  steps.

Features  and  Results

Our  system  developed  in  this  work  is  organized  in  three 
main  parts  -  graphical  user  interfaces,  an  application 
server  and  an  integrated  database.  The  system  offers  an 
attractive  way  to  many  of  the  specialized  or  single-task 
analyses  over  the  Web.  In  particular,  it  has  sophisticated 
graphical  user  interfaces  (GUIs)  with  a  wide  range  of 
well-tested  analytical  functions,  database,  and  well-ma-
intained  user-support  applications  to  make  most  as-
pects  of  post-PKS  tailoring  enzyme  analysis  simpler. 
    The  core  part  of  our  system  is  PPTE  (Post-PKS 
Tailoring  Enzymes)  database  that  we  have  constructed 
at  local  site  through  this  work.  The  PPTE  is  im-
plemented  as  a  relational  database  using  MySQL  data-
base  management  system.  This  is  specifically  designed 
for  glycosyltransferases  (GTs),  methyltransferases  (MTs) 
and  hydroxylases  (HLs)  involved  in  post-PKS  tailoring 
step  and  consists  of  ten  main  tables.  The  information  in 
PPTE  is  collected  from  three  different  sources:  InterPro, 

CAZY,  and  GenPept.  InterPro  is  a  database  of  protein 
families,  domains,  repeats  and  functional  sites  in  which 
identifiable  features  found  in  known  proteins  can  be  ap-
plied  to  new  protein  sequences  (http://www.ebi.ac.uk). 
The  CAZY  database  describes  the  families  of  structur-
ally-related  catalytic  and  carbohydrate-binding  modules 
(or  functional  domains)  of  enzymes  that  degrade,  mod-
ify,  or  create  glycosidic  bonds  (http://www.cazy.org). 
GenPept  is  a  genetics  sequence  databank  which  con-
tains  translations  of  coding  sequences  in  the  GenBank 
nucleotide  sequence  database  (http://www.ncbil.nlm.nih. 
gov/). 
    The  overall  procedure  for  PPTE  construction  can  be 
described  in  Fig.  1.  PPTE  follows  the  GenPept  format 
and  conventions  as  closely  as  possible.  The  production 
of  PPTE  starts  with  searching  CAZY  and  GenPept  with 
all  possible  queries  that  have  been  made  up  of  combi-
nations  of  polyketide  names  and  tailoring  enzyme 
names.  At  this  stage  all  annotation  you  can  find  in  a 
PPTE  entry  comes  from  the  corresponding  GenPept  and 
CAZY  entries.  The  first  post-processing  step  is  the  re-
moval  of  redundancy.  The  redundancy  of  the  database 
was  eliminated  by  merging  separate  entries  correspond-
ing  to  the  same  entity.  The  second  post-processing  step 
is  to  scan  all  retrieved  protein  sequences  against 
InterPro  databases  with  InterProScan  and  to  get  addi-
tional  annotation  related  to  protein  families,  domains,  re-
peats  and  functional  sites.  InterProScan  is  a  wrapper  on 
top  of  a  set  of  applications  for  scanning  protein  se-
quences  against  InterPro  member  databases  and  pro-
vides  an  efficient  way  to  analyze  protein  sequences  for 
known  domains  and  functional  sites  by  launching  the 

Fig.  1.  The  overall  procedure 
for  PPTE  database 
construction.  PPTE  consists  of  ten  main  tables  and  its 
three  different  sources  are  InterPro,  CAZY,  and  GenPept.
Refer  to  detailed  description  in  the  text.

Computational  Approach  for  Biosynthetic  Engineering  of  Post-PKS  Tailoring  Enzymes    229

Fig.  2.  The  application  server  consists  of  four  modules 
–  Polyketides,  DB  Search,  BLAST  Search  and  Genome 
Analysis.  The  feature  of  each  module  is  described  in 
detail  in  the  text.  Through  this  application  server,  we 
can  retrieve  comprehensive  information  on  tailoring  en-
zymes,  GenPept  and  InterPro  from  PPTE  and  also  car-
ry  out  various  analyses  such  as  prediction of functions of
individual proteins, automatic annotation of newly sequenced
proteins,  searching  for  new  protein  families,  yielding  a  hier-
archical  organization  of  gene  clusters,  etc.

applications  in  parallel.  Finally,  we  have  parsed  the  out-
put  of  two  previous  steps  and  combined  the  results  at 
the  level  of  unified  attributes  into  one  representation. 
The  database  PPTE  provides  a  comprehensive,  non-re-
dundant  and  up-to-date  protein  sequence  database  of 
tailoring  enzymes  with  high  information  content.
    The  application  server  consists  of  four  modules  - 
Polyketides,  DB  Search,  BLAST  Search  and  Genome 
Analysis  (Fig.  2).  Our  system  has  sophisticated  graphical 
user  interfaces  with  four  main  menus  that  correspond  to 
four  modules  in  application  server  (Fig.  3).  Polyketide 
module  is  to  search  for  polyketides  and  its  related  in-
formation  in  PPTE,  including  tailoring  enzymes,  GenPept 
information,  and  InterPro  information.  While  working  with 
full  text  searches  one  may  use  DB  Search  module  to  re-
trieve  all  information  (i.e.,  tailoring  enzymes,  GenPept  in-
formation  and  InterPro  information)  from  PPTE.  BLAST 
Search  module  is  developed  for  homology-based  analy-
sis  of  input  genome  sequence,  which  is  based  on  analy-
sis  of  all  pairwise  comparisons  between  input  sequence 
and  protein  sequences  of  PPTE.  The  analysis  can  be 
carried  out  for  different  levels  of  protein  similarity,  yield-
ing  a  hierarchical  organization  of  clusters  on  the  input 
sequence.  This  module  can  be  used  for  prediction  of 
functions  of  individual  proteins,  automatic  annotation  of 
newly  sequenced  proteins,  searching  for  new  protein 
families,  yielding  a  hierarchical  organization  of  gene 
clusters.  Even  though  Genome  Analysis  module  has  the 
same  features  that  BLAST  Search  module  has,  it  has 
been  developed  to  be  optimized  for  whole  genome 

Fig.  3.  Our  system  has  sophisticated  graphical  user  inter-
faces  (GUIs)  with  four  main  menus  –  Polyketides,  DB 
Search, Blast Search and Genome Analysis. GUIs offers an 
efficient way to many of the specialized or single-tank analy-
ses  over  the  Web.

analysis  (Lee  et al.,  2007),  providing  the  framework  for 
the  presentation  of  genome-wide  functional  data. 

Discussion

Combinatorial  biosynthesis  is  defined  by  C.  Khosla  as  to 
“involve  genetically  engineering  biosynthetic  pathways  in 
such  a  way  that  they  may  be  combinatorially  re-
constructed  to  produce  libraries  of  novel  small  mole-
cules  that  are  appropriate  for  use  in  screening  for  new 
drugs”  (Khosla  and  Zawada,  1996).  Post-PKS  tailoring 
steps  are  necessary  to  add  functional  groups  essential 
for  the  biological  activity  and  are  therefore  important  in 
the  biosynthesis.  Targeted  gene  inactivation  of  post-PKS 
enzymes  does  not  only  present  a  very  useful  tool  for  the 
elucidation  of  biosynthetic  pathways  by  analysis  of  ac-
cumulated  intermediates  or  shunt  products,  but  is  also 
used  in  the  context  of  combinatorial  biosynthesis  to 
generate  new  “unnatural”  products  with  altered  bio-
logical  activities.  Not  only  can  a  single  modification  be 
introduced  into  a  polyketide  structure,  but  even  multiple 
alterations  can  be  incorporated  simultaneously  through 
the  rational  approach  of  biosynthetic  engineering.  The 
technology  of  biosynthetic  engineering  of  enzymes  in-
volved  in  polyketide  synthesis  has  also  disadvantages 
compared  to  the  semi-synthetic  chemistry  approach. 
Although  it  may  sound  very  lucrative  to  be  able  to  re-
place  various  functional  groups  of  a  natural  polyketide, 
it  must  be  noted  that  not  all  of  the  modifications  at-
tempted  have  been  successful.

230    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  227-230,  December  2008

    As  mentioned  above,  genetic  manipulation  of  related 
genes  provides  useful  information  on  the  functions  and 
characteristics  of  the  encoded  enzymes;  the  ultimate 
goal  being  rational  design  and  generation  of  novel  hy-
brid  natural  products.  The  progress  toward  this  goal  has 
been  slow,  as  many  experiments  have  been  and  still  are 
conducted  in  a  semi-random  mix-and-match  fashion, 
especially  for  post-PKS  tailoring  enzymes.  In  this  re-
spect,  we  have  developed  the  well-established  compu-
tational  system  for  analyzing  and  retrieving  post-PKS 
tailoring  enzymes  and  related  information.  This  system 
will  readily  lend  itself  to  facilitating  the  use  of  genetic 
engineering  to  develop  non-natural  analogues  of  com-
mercially  valuable  products.  Furthermore,  it  will  also 
pave  the  way  to  a  more  rational  approach  employing 
genes  encoding  post-PKS  tailoring  enzymes.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  MOCIE  grants  from  Intelli-
gence  Bioinformatics  and  Application  Center,  KRIBB.

References

Altschul,  S.F.,  Gish,  W.,  Miller,  W.,  Myers,  E.W.,  and 
Lipman,  D.J.  (1990).  Basic  local  alignment  search  tool. J. 
Mol. Biol.  213,  403-410.

Faust,  B.,  Hoffmeister,  D.,  Weitnauer,  G.,  Westrich,  L., 
Haag,  S.,  Schneider,  P.,  Decker,  H.,  Kunzel,  E.,  Rohr,  J., 
and  Bechthold,  A.  (2000).  Two  new  tailoring  enzymes,  a 
glycosyltransferase  and  an  oxygenase,  involved  in  bio-
synthesis  of  the  angucycline  antibiotic  urdamycin  A  in 
Streptomyces fradiae  Tu2717. Microbiology 146,  147-154.

Floss,  H.G.  (2001).  Antibiotic  biosynthesis:  from  natural  to 
unnatural  compounds.  J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  27, 
183-194.

Hopwood,  D.A.,  and  Sherman,  D.H.  (1990).  Molecular  ge-
netics  of  polyketides  and  its  comparison  with  Fatty  acid 
biosynthesis.  Annu. Rev. Genet.  24,  37-66.

Kwan,  D.H.,  Sun,  Y.,  Schulz,  F.,  Hong,  H.,  Popovic,  B., 
Sim-stark,  J.C.,  Haydock,  S.F.,  and  Leadlay,  P.F.  (2008). 
Prediction  and  manipulation  of  the  stereochemistry  of 
enoylreduction  in  modular  polyketide  synthases.  Chem. 
Biol.  15,  1231-1240.

Khosla,  C.,  and  Zawada,  R.J.  (1996).  Generation  of  polyke-
tide  libraries  via  combinatorial  biosynthesis.  Trends. Bio-
technol.  14,  335-341.

Lee,  D.,  Seo,  H.,  Hahn,  J.,  Kong,  E.,  and  Park,  K.  (2007). 
RISS:  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.  ssp.  Japonica)  genome  in-
formation  service  system.  Genomics  &  Informatics  5, 
194-195.

Mendez,  C.,  and  Salas,  J.A.  (2001).  Altering  the  glyco-
sylation  pattern  of  bioactive  compounds.  Trends. Bio-
technol.  19,  449-56.

Rix,  U.,  Fischer,  C.,  Remsing,  L.,  and  Rohr,  J.  (2002). 
Modification  of  post-PKS  tailoring  steps  through  combi-
natorial  biosynthesis.  Nat. Prod. Rep.  19,  542-580.

Staunton,  J.,  and  Weissman,  K.  (2001)  Polyketide  biosyn-
thesis:  a  millennium  review. Nat. Prod. Rep.  18,  380-416.
Trefzer,  A.,  Salas,  J.A.,  and  Bechthold,  A.  (1999).  Genes 
and  enzymes  involved  in  deoxysugar  biosynthesis  in 
bacteria.  Nat. Prod. Rep.  16,  283-299.

Xue,  Y.,  and  Sherman,  D.  H.  (2001)  Biosynthesis  and  com-
binatorial  biosynthesis  of  pikromycin-related  macrolides  in 
Streptomyces venezuelas. Metab. Eng.  3,  15-26.

Yadav,  G.,  Gokhale,  R.S.,  and  Mohanty,  D.  (2003).  Compu-
tational  Approach  for  prediction  of  Domain  Organization 
and  Substrate  Specificity  of  Modular  Polyketide  Syn-
thases.  J. Mol. Biol.  328,  335-363.

