MIN/REVIEW 

Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  4(2) 51-56,  June 2006 

Sample Size and Power Estimation in Case-Control Genetic 
Association Studies 

ChuiAhn 

Department  of  Medicine,  University  of  Texas  Medical 
School,  Houston,  TX  77030,  USA 

Abstract 
In  planning a genetic association study,  it is necessary to 
determine the  number of samples to  be  collected  for the 
study  in  order  to  achieve  sufficient  power  to  detect  the 
hypothesized effect. The case-control design is increasingly 
used for genetic association studies due to the simplicity of 
its design. We review the methods for the sample size and 
power  calculations  in  case-control  genetic  association 
studies between a marker locus and a disease phenotype. 

Keywords:  case-control  study,  sample  size,  genetic 
association 

I ntrocluction 
Genetic association studies assess correlations between 
a disease phenotype and  a marker genotype on  a pop(cid:173)
ulation or family-based scale.  In  some respects,  testing 
for an  association  between a disease phenotype and  a 
marker locus is not different from testing for statistical as(cid:173)
sociation between any two variables, regardless of being 
genetic or not.  Thus,  many statistical methods used to 
analyze ordinary statistical association are also used for 
genetic association. However, there are important differ(cid:173)
ences between genetic association and statistical asso(cid:173)
ciation in the study design and analysis. 

Genetic  association  studies  have  been  mostly 
performed in a case-control study setting that has been 
well  developed  for  use  in  epidemiological  methods 
(Romero  et  a/.,  2002).  The  case-control  design  is 
increasingly used for genetic association studies due to its 
simplicity  in  design.  Significant  differences  in  allele 
frequencies or genotype frequencies between cases and 
controls are taken as evidence for involvement of an allele 
or  genotype  in  disease  susceptibility.  In  planning  a 
genetic association study, it is necessary to determine the 

*Corresponding author: E-mail Chui.W.Ahn@uth.tmc.edu, 
Tel +1-713-500-6701, Fax +1-713-500-6722 
Accepted 31  May 2006 

number of samples to be collected for the study in order 
to  achieve  sufficient  power to  detect the  hypothesized 
effect.  A  genetic  association  study  that  is  conducted 
without  attention  to  sample  size  or  power  information 
takes  the  risks  of  either  failing  to  detect  important 
meaningful  differences  (i.e.,  type  II  error)  or taking  an 
unnecessarily excessive number of samples for a study. 
Either case fails to adhere to the Ethical Guidelines of the 
American  Statistical Association which  says "Avoid the 
use  of  excessive  of  inadequate  number  of  research 
subjects by making informed recommendations for study 
size" (American Statistical Association,  1999). While the 
exact final number that will be used for the analysis will be 
unknown  due  to  missing  information  such  as  lack  of 
genotype  information  and  clinical  information,  it  is  still 
desirable to determine a target sample size based on the 
proposed study design. 

The sample size estimate will allow the estimation of 
total  cost of the proposed study required.  Typically,  the 
number of samples is computed to provide a fixed  level 
of power under a specified  alternative  hypothesis.  The 
alternative  hypothesis  usually  represents  a  minimal 
meaningful  difference in  the frequency of genotypes or 
alleles  between  cases  and  controls.  Power 
(1-
probability of type II  error) is an  important consideration 
for several reasons. Low power can cause a true difference 
in  allele  frequencies  or genotype frequencies  between 
cases  and  controls to  be  rejected.  However,  too  much 
power may make results statistically significant that are 
not meaningfully different. The probability of type I error 
(a) of 0.05 and power of 0.80 and 0.90 has been widely 
used for the sample size estimation in genetic association 
studies.  In  this  paper,  we  restrict  our  attention  to  the 
sample  size  and  power  calculations  for  case-control 
genetic association studies between a marker locus and 
a disease phenotype on a population- based scale. 

Sample size detennination based on 
allelic frequencies 
Either the candidate allelic or genotypic frequencies are 
compared  to  evaluate  genetic  associations  between 
cases  and  controls.  The  geneticist  usually  prefers 
comparing allelic frequencies on the grounds that,  in the 
absence  of an  association,  sampling  genotypes  under 
Hardy-Weinberg  Equilibrium  (HWE)  is  equivalent  to 

52  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 4(2) 51-56, June 2006 

sampling  gametes,  or  alleles  from  the  gene  pool  that 
gives  rise  to  the  population  (Lalouel  and  Rohrwasser, 
2002).  When  allele frequencies  are compared,  the  two 
alleles of each subject are treated as independent. Even 
though  comparison  of allele  frequencies  seems  to  be 
counter-intuitive  because  alleles  sometimes do  not act 
independently,  this  approach  has  been  often  used  in 
genetic  association  studies  (e.g.  Apple  et  at.,  1994; 
Odunsi  et a/.,  1995).  Power  and  sample  size  for  chi(cid:173)
square  tests  for  comparing  allelic  frequencies  can  be 
found  in  Lachin (1977) and Guenther (1973).  There are 
many available statistical software programs that can be 
used  to  estimate the  sample  size  or power needed  to 
detect  minimal  allele  frequencies  between  cases  and 
controls.  For  example,  commercial  software  such  as 
nQuery  (Eiashoff,  2005)  or  Power  and  Precision 
(Borenstein  eta/.,  2001) or StatXact (Mehta and  Patel, 
2006)  or non-commercial  software such  as  PS  (Power 
and  Sample  size  calculation,  which  is  available  at 
http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/twiki/bin/view/Main/Pow 
erSampleSize) can be used to estimate the sample size 
or power based on allele frequencies of cases and controls. 

Sample size detennination based on 
genotype frequencies 
There  are  two  commonly  used  statistical  tests  for the 
estimation of sample size and power using genotypes in 
genetic  association  studies.  One  is 
the  Cochran(cid:173)
Armitage linear trend test (Armitage, 1955) and the other 
is a genotypic association test (Gordon et at.,  2002). 

1. Cochran-Annitage Linear Trend Test 
Sasieni (1997) investigates the relationship between the 
approaches  of  using  alleles  and  genotypes,  and  con(cid:173)
cludes that the allelic chi-square test based on alleles is 
inappropriate when  genotype frequencies violate  HWE 
and that the Cochran-Armitage's linear trend test should 
be used instead. The two tests are asymptotically equiv(cid:173)
alent  under  HWE.  Kang  eta/.,  (2005)  investigate  per(cid:173)
formances  of the  allelic  chi-square  test  when  HWE  is 
violated.  They  investigate  the  maximum  and  minimum 
values of type I error rate of the allelic chi-square test by 
using  nonlinear  programming  and  simulation.  It  is  re(cid:173)
vealed that,  under violated  HWE,  the allelic chi-square 
test  has  distorted  type  I  error  rate.  Allele  frequencies 
should  be  compared  only  when  genotype  frequencies 
are in HWE. 

In  a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with two 
possible  alleles,  'A'  or  '8',  there  are  three  possible 
genotypes,  'AA',  'AB',  and  '88'.  Study  subjects  can  be 

Table 1. Data from case-control studies 

Cases 
Controls 
Total 

M 
n10 
noo 
no 

AB 
n11 
f1o1 
n1 

BB 
n12 
no2 
n2 

Total 
N1 
No 
N 

classified  into  a  2x3  table  based  on  each  subject's 
disease status (case or control) and genotype.  Table 1 
shows  the  genotype  data  from  case-control  studies. 
Here,  the  two  rows  refer to  disease  status  (cases  and 
controls),  and the 3 columns refer to the genotypes. 

Given disease status, the distribution of genotypes is 
multinomial with parameter vectors p=(po, p,, pz) for cases 
and  q=(qo,  q,,  qz)  for  controls,  where  the  subscript 
corresponds  to  the  number  of  high  risk  alleles  in  the 
genotype. Slager and Schaid (2001) specify the values of 
Pi  and q  using the information on  penetrances (fo,  f,,  fz) 
and the marginal genotype probabilities (go, g,, gz). Here, 
the penetrance ~is the conditional probability P(affectedl 
j copies of disease allele), where j=O,  1, or 2 for a di-allelic 
disease  locus.  The  information  on  penetrance and  the 
marginal genotype probabilities can be obtained from the 
prior  data  based  on  the  literature  or  pilot  study  or an 
assumed genetic model. The values of Pi  and q  can  be 
calculated from the following equations. 

Pi  = figi /(I. figi  ), 
q = (1-fi )gi /{I.  (1-fi)Qi} 

Once Pi  and  qi  are computed  from fi  and  gi,  sample 
size  software  for  Cochran-Armitage  trend  test  can  be 
used to estimate the  sample size  or power needed  for 
the association between genotypes and disease status. 
Slager and Schaid (2001) provide a sample size formula 
for  Cochran-Armitage  trend  test,  and  evaluate  the 
performances of their sample size formula under different 
disease  prevalence,  genotypic relative  risks  and  allelic 
effects  such  as  multiplicative,  additive,  dominant  and 
recessive models based on  high-risk allele frequencies. 
Cochran-Armitage  trend  test  can  be  obtained  as  the 
score  test  using  the  logistic  regression  with  a  single 
covariate  depending  on 
individual's  genotype. 
Cochran-Armitage trend test is a locally optimal test for 
the  given  set  of  scores.  Slager  and  Schaid  (2001) 
demonstrate that their sample size formula  is generally 
quite accurate by showing that their empirical powers are 
close to the expected powers through simulation. 

the 

When  the  variance  of  the  Cochran-Armitage  trend 
test statistic is known, the formulas for sample size and 
power are readily obtained.  In  practice,  the variance of 
the test statistics is unknown, and needs to be estimated. 
Freidlin et at. (2002) present formulas for the sample size 

needed for case-control genetic association studies at a 
pre-specified  power  when  the  variance  of  the  test 
statistic  is  unknown.  Since  these  values  are  typically 
unknown  for  complex  diseases  such  as  diabetes, 
cancer,  and  cardiovascular  disease,  one  considers  a 
range  of  values  for  parameters  to  deal  with  such 
uncertainty.  Cox and  Hinkley (1974)  suggest  reporting 
median sample size and/or power values or worst-case 
scenarios that yield  the  largest  sample size  needed  or 
the smallest  power.  This  suggestion  has  been  used  in 
several genetic applications (Cousin eta/., 2003; Gordon 
eta/.,  2005;  Zheng  and  Tian,  2005).  This  suggestion 
leads  us  to  observe  a  distribution  of  sample  size  (or 
power)  values  for  the  range  of  parameter  values 
considered, including minimum, maximum, median, and 
average sample size (or power) values. 

2. Genotypic association test 
Association  between  disease  status  and  genotype  is 
tested  using  the  chi-square  test  statistic  on  2x3 
contingency  tables.  If  the  chi-square  test  yields  a 
significant result, then we may say that the marker locus 
seems to be in close proximity to such a susceptibility locus 
for a disease. Sample size or power can be estimated using 
the noncentrality parameter, which can be computed from 
the asymptotic distribution of the chi-square test on 2x3 
contingency  tables  under  a  specified  alternative 
hypothesis (Mitra,  1958). Sample size estimate software 
such as nQuery can be used to estimate the sample size 
or power from 2x3 contingency tables. Purcell eta/. (2003) 
give  description  of  Genetic  Power  Calculator  (GPC) 
package which performs power calculations for the design 
of linkage  and  association  genetic  mapping  studies  of 
complex traits.  GPC software can  be obtained from the 
website http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/-purcell/gpc/. 

Power and Sample size estimation in 
the  presence of genotype errors 
There is considerable  mistyping  in  most genotype data 
due  to  biochemical  anomalies,  human  oversights,  or 
shortcomings  in  genotyping  scoring  software  (Sobel  et 
a/.,  2002).  Genotyping  errors  lead  to  inflation  in  type  I 
errors  or  a  decrease  in  power,  and  bias  in  statistical 
inference in genetic association studies. 

Gordon  et  a/.,  (2001,  2002,  2003)  quantify  the 
genotyping error effects on  the sample size and  power 
needed to maintain asymptotic type I error and type II error 
rates 
for  case-control  genetic  association  studies 
between a SNP locus and a disease phenotype. Software 
PAWE (Power for Association With Errors) to estimate the 

Case-Control Study, Sample Size, Genetic Association  53 

sample  size  and  power 
for  genetic  case-control 
association studies allowing for genotyping error can be 
found from http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe/. Software 
PAWE provides power and sample size calculations for 
case-control studies with a di-allelic locus such as SNP in 
the presence of genotyping errors. The results obtained 
from data without genotyping errors by software PAWE 
are identical to those obtained by other genetic association 
test power calculators,  for example,  the Genetic Power 
Calculator  (GPC).  Software  PAWE-30  (Gordon  eta/., 
2005) plots for power and sample size calculations over 
a range of parameters including genotypic errors for the 
Cochran-Armitage  linear  trend  test  and  the  genotypic 
association test.  Software is available from the website 
http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe3d/. 

Kang  et  a/.,  (2004)  examine  which  genotype 
misclassification  errors  are  most  costly,  in  terms  of 
increased sample size to maintain asymptotic power and 
significance  level.  They  use  chi-square  test  for  2x3 
contingency  tables  instead  of 2x2  contingency  tables 
since  the  allelic  chi-square  test  based  on  alleles  is 
inappropriate when genotype frequencies violate HWE. 
Use  of allelic test  may  be  inappropriate  even  in  HWE 
when  genotyping  errors  are  present.  They  show  that 
misclassifying  a  more  common  genotype  as  the  less 
common genotype requires a larger sample size than the 
reverse misclassification. 

Power and Sample size estimation in 
the  presence of phenotype errors 
Edwards  et  a/.  (2005)  describe  high  phenotype  mis(cid:173)
classification  rates cited  in  several  studies.  Edwards et 
a/.  (2005)  present  an  impact  of phenotype  error,  also 
known as diagnostic error, on power and sample size es(cid:173)
timates for case-control  genetic association studies be(cid:173)
tween  a  disease  phenotype  and  a  marker  locus.  The 
sensitivity and  specificity of the  diagnostic test  are de(cid:173)
fined  as  sensitivity=Pr(observed  case  1 true  affected) 
and  specificity=Pr( observed  control  1 true  unaffected). 
Two types of diagnostic errors are: Pr( observed control! 
true affected) = 1 - sensitivity and Pr( observed case 1 true 
unaffected)= 1 -specificity. 

An example of diagnostic errors involves the use of the 
prostate  specific  antigen  (PSA)  test  for  diagnosis  of 
prostate cancer. Although prostate cancer is the second 
leading cause of cancer deaths in men and accounted for 
an  estimated 220,900 new cases and 28,900 deaths in 
the United States in 2003,  screening for it with the PSA 
blood  test  and  digital  rectal  exam  (DRE)  remains 
controversial. Screening cannot predict the kind of cancer 

54  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  4(2) 51-56, June 2006 

a man may have and who will die from it. As a screening 
test,  PSA has a sensitivity of about 67.5% to 80% and a 
specificity of about 60% to 70% when the level is greater 
than 4.0 ng/ml (American Urological Association, 2000; 
Catalona  eta/.,  1991;  Brawer,  1999;  Oesterling  eta/., 
1993; Carteret a/.,  1992). Although autopsy studies have 
shown that approximately one in three men over age 50 
has histological evidence of prostate cancer,  most have 
clinically insignificant disease and only about 3% of men 
will die from it (American Urological Association,  2000). 
Edwards  et a/.  (2005)  conduct  a  genotypic  test  of 
association using the Pearson chi-square test statistic on 
2x3  contingency  tables  in  the  presence  of phenotype 
errors. Sample size or power is obtained as a function of 
noncentrality parameter expressed  in  terms  of sample 
sizes, genotype frequencies, and phenotype error model 
parameters. Zheng and Tian (2005) investigate the impact 
of phenotype errors on sample size and power using the 
Cochran-Armitage  trend  test  under  various  genetic 
models. Both Edwards eta/. (2005) and Zheng and Tian 
(2005) make a key assumption that phenotype errors are 
random  and  independent,  and  furthermore  they  are 
non-differential with respect to a particular genotype. Both 
Zheng and Tian (2005) and Edwards eta/. (2005) illustrate 
that phenotype misclassification errors can substantially 
decrease  the  asymptotic  power  to  detect  association 
between  a  trait  locus  and  a  marker  locus.  Software 
PAWE-PH  to  estimate  power  or  sample  size  under 
random phenotype misclassification errors or diagnostic 
errors  is  available  from  the  website  http://linkage. 
rockefeller.edu/pawe/paweph.htm. 

One of interesting findings is that for many diseases in 
which prevalence is less than or equal to  1 0%,  it is much 
more important to insure that cases are truly cases rather 
than  controls  being  truly  controls  (Edwards  et  a/.,  2005, 
Zheng and Tian,  2005). That is,  it is much more important 
to have less phenotype errors in cases than in controls. 

the  noncentrality  parameter 

PO\\Er and  Sample  size  estimation  in  the 
presence of genotype and phenotype errors 
Ji eta/. (in press) derive the sample size and power esti(cid:173)
the 
mates  using 
Likelihood  Ratio  Test Allowing  for Error (LRTae)  in  the 
presence  of  random  phenotype  and  genotype  errors. 
They justify the  sample  size  and  power through  simu(cid:173)
lations using various combinations of genotype frequen(cid:173)
cies,  phenotype  and  genotype  misclassification  proba(cid:173)
bilities,  total sample size,  and  ratio of cases to controls. 
Contour plots can be generated using the software avail(cid:173)
able  at  the  website  http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/lrtae/ 

for 

contour.html. 

Examples 
Afshar-Kharghan  et  a/.  (2004)  investigate  the 
association  between  the risk of coronary heart disease 
and  the  variable  number  of  tandem  repeat  (VNTR) 
polymorphism of platelet glycoprotein lb a (GP lb a).  It is 
shown that CC genotype is associated with a lower risk 
of  CHD  events  than  the  other  genotypes  in  African(cid:173)
Americans. Kang eta/. (2004) show that HWE holds well 
for GP lb a VNTR from the data of Afshar-Kharghan eta/. 
(2004).  The B allele frequencies of case and controls in 
African-Americans  are  0.287  and  0.146  for cases  and 
controls,  respectively. 

Suppose  that  we  wish  to  estimate  the  sample  size 
needed to obtain 90% power at a 5%  significance level 
with  an  equal  number  of  case  and  controls  for  the 
chi-square 
test  on  genotypes.  The  sample  size 
calculations  are  conducted  using  the  software  PAWE 
(http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe/)  as  follows:  on  the 
first  page,  'Sample size calculations for a fixed  power', 
'Genetic  model  free  method',  'Douglas  Skol  Boehnke', 
'Significance  levei=0.05';  on  the  second  page,  'Power 
level  between  0  and  1=0.90',  'Ratio  of  controls  to 
cases=1',  'Hardy  Weinberg  Equilibrium  for  cases  and 
controls=yes',  'y=0.02'  and  'TJ=0.02';  on  the third  page, 
'case  1  allele  frequency=0.287'  and  'control  1  allele 
frequency=0.146'.  Then, 
the  required  sample  size 
estimates  are  111  cases  and  111  controls  when  no 
errors  are  present  (When  no  errors  are  present,  error 
model  parameters are not important since we only look 
at  the  sample  size  estimates  from  the  results  of 'Data 
Without  Error').  Let's  assume  that  the  probability  of 
misclassifying  homozygote  as  heterozygote  is  2%  and 
the  probability  of  misclassifying  heterozygote  as 
homozygote is 2%.  It is assumed that homozygotes are 
not  misclassified  as  other  homozygotes.  The  minimal 
sample sizes  required  are  117 cases and  117 controls 
when  random  genotype  errors  are  present.  Thus,  the 
presence of genotype errors results in a 5.94% increase 
in sample size to maintain the same statistical power. 

Discussion 
In this paper, we limit our attention to the sample size and 
power calculations for case-control genetic association 
studies between a marker locus and a disease phenotype 
on  a  population-based scale.  In  addition to  genetic 
association studies using unrelated individuals on  a 
population-based scale,  there are family-based genetic 

association studies, which sample families through one or 
more probands.  Family-based genetic association 
studies are originally developed to deal with problems of 
population stratification.  Sample size or power of the 
family-based association studies can be estimated with 
the family-based association test (FBAT) statistic (Laird et 
at.  (2000)) for virtually any given study design and 
ascertainment conditions with the interactive software 
package PBAT {http://www. biostat. harvard,edu/-clange/ 
default. htm). 

Complex  diseases  such  as  hypertension  and  their 
complications  are  the  consequence  of  interactions 
between  many  genetic  and  environmental  factors.  In 
general, the genes contributing to risk of hypertension do 
not have the same effects in different environments, or in 
different genetic backgrounds. Genetic effects may involve 
gene-gene  interactions  as  well  as  gene-environment 
interactions.  The software  Quanto (http://hydra.usc.edu/ 
gxe/)  computes  sample  size  or  power  for  association 
studies  of  genes,  gene-environment  interaction,  or 
gene-gene interaction for a variety of study designs such 
as matched case-control, case-sibling, case-parent, and 
case-only designs. 

In  addition 

to  case-control  association  designs, 
cohort designs are also commonly used to test genetic 
association between a disease phenotype and a marker 
locus  when  the  sample  unit  consists  of  unrelated 
individuals.  Some  studies  such  as  LUMINA  study 
(Reveille et at.,  1988) and GENISOS study (Reveille et 
a/., 2001) have begun to employ cohort designs to study 
genetic associations using unrelated individuals. 

The advantages of cohort studies  over case-control 
studies are ascertainment of cases, elimination of recall 
bias,  and  reduction  of possible population stratification. 
The disadvantages are cost and time needed to recruit 
and measure genetic and environmental data over time. 
When  the  outcome  (phenotype)  measurements  are 
made over time in cohort studies, sample size for testing 
genetic association can be estimated using generalized 
estimating  equation  (GEE)  approaches  for  continuous 
and  binary outcomes.  (Jung and Ahn,  2003,  2005; Ahn 
and  Jung,  2003,  2005).  Jung  and  Ahn  (2003,  2005) 
provide a closed-form sample size formula by accounting 
for  the  missing  data  and  the  correlation  between 
repeated measurements. 

References 
Afshar-Kharghan,  V.,  Aleksic,  N.,  Ahn,  C.  Boerwinkle,  E., 
Wu,  K.,  and  Lopez,  J.  (2004).  The variable  number of 
tandem repeat polymorphism of platelet glycoprotein lb a 
and  risk of coronary heart disease. Blood 103, 963-965. 

Case-Control Study,  Sample Size,  Genetic Association  55 

Ahn, C. and Jung, S. (2003). Efficiency of GEE estimators of 
slopes  in  repeated  measurements:  Adding  subjects  or 
adding  measurements?  Drug  Information  Journal  37, 
309-316. 

Ahn, C. and Jung, S. (2005). Effect of dropout on sample size 
estimates on trends across repeated measurements. J.  of 
Biopharmaceutical Statistics 15,  33-41. 

American Statistical Association. (1999).  Ethical guidelines 
for  statistical  practice:  Executive  Summary.  Amstat 
NewsApril,  12-15. 

American  Urological Association.  (2000).  Prostate-specific 
antigen (PSA) best practice policy. Oncology 14, 267-280. 
Apple,  R.,  Erlich,  H.,  Klitz,  W.,  Manos,  M.,  Becker,  T.,  and 
Wheeler,  C.  (1994).  HLA  DR-DQ  associations  with 
cervical carcinoma show papillomavirus-type specificity. 
Nature Genetics 6,  157-162. 

Armitage,  P.  (1955).  Tests for linear trends  in  proportions 

and frequencies.  Biometrics 11, 375-386. 

Borenstein, M.,  Rothstein, H., and Cohen, J.  (2001 ).  Power 

and Precision Biostat,  Inc.  Englewood,  NJ. 

Brawer,  M.K.  (1999).  Prostate-specific  antigen:  current 

status.  CA  Cancer J.  Clin.  49,  264-281. 

Carter,  H.B.,  Pearson, J.D.,  Metter,  E.J.,  Brant,  L.J.,  Chan, 
D.W., Andres,  R.,  Fozard, J.L., and Walsh,  P.C.  (1992). 
Longitudinal  evaluation  of  prostate-specific  antigen 
levels  in  men with  and without prostate disease.  JAMA 
267,  2215-2220. 

Catalona,  W.J.,  Smith,  D.S.,  Ratliff,  T.L.,  Dodds,  K.M., 
Coplen, D.E., Yuan, J.J., Petros, J.A., andAndriole, G.L. 
(1991 ).  Measurement  of  prostate-specific  antigen  in 
serum as a screening test for prostate cancer. N.  Engl. J. 
Med.  324,  1156-1161. 

Cox, D. and Hinkley, D. (1974).  Theoretical Statistics. (Boca 

Raton:  Chapman and Haii/CRC Press). 

Cousin, E., Genin, E., Mace, S.,  Ricard, S., Chansac, C., del 
Zompo,  M., and Deleuze, J.  (2003). Association studies 
in  candidate  genes:  strategies  to  select  SNPs  to  be 
tested.  Human Heredity 56,  151-159. 

Douglas, J., Skol, A, and Boehnke, M. (2002). Probability of 
detection  of  genotyping  errors  and  mutations  as 
in  nuclear-family  data. 
inheritance 
American Journal of Human Genetics 70,  487-495. 

inconsistencies 

Edwards,  B.,  Haynes,  C.,  Levenstien,  M.,  Finch,  S.,  and 
Gordon, G.  (2005).  Power and sample size calculations 
in  the  presence  of  phenotype  errors  for  case/control 
genetic association studies.  BMC Genetics 2005, 6,  18 
Elashoff,  J.  (2005).  nQuery Advisol"  Version  6.0  User's 

Guide.  (Los Angeles, CA). 

Freidlin,  B.,  Zheng,  G.,  Li,  Z.,  and  Gastwirth,  J.  (2002). 
Trend tests for case-control studies of genetic markers: 
power, sample size and robustness. Human Heredity 53, 
146-152. 

56  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  4(2) 51-56,  June 2006 

Gordon,  D.,  Heath,  S.C.,  Liu,  X.,  and  Ott,  J.  (2001).  A 
transmission  disequilibrium  that  allows  for  genotyping 
errors in the analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism 
data. American Journal of Human Genetics 69, 371-380. 
Gordon,  D.,  Finch,  S.,  Nothnagel,  M.,  and  Ott,  J.  (2002). 
Power  and  sample  size  calculation  for  case-control 
genetic  association  tests  when  errors  are  present: 
Application to single nucleotide polymorphisms. Human 
Heredity 54,  22-33. 

Gordon,  D.,  Levenstien,  M.,  Finch,  S.,  and  Ott,  J.  (2003). 
Errors and linkage disequilibrium interact multiplicatively 
when computing sample sizes for genetic  case-control 
association studies. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 
490-501. 

Gordon,  D.,  Haynes,  C.,  Blumenfeld,  J.,  and  Finch,  S. 
(2005).  "PAWE-3D:  visualizing  Power  for  Association 
With  Error  in  case/control  genetic  studies  of complex 
traits",  Bioinforrnatics 21,  3935-3937. 

Guenther, W. (1977). Power and sample size for approximate 

chi-square tests. Am Stat 31,  83-85. 

Ji,  F.,  Yang,  Y.,  Haynes,  C.,  Finch,  S.,  and Gordon,  D.  (in 
press) Computing asymptotic power and sample size for 
case-control genetic association studies in the presence 
of phenotype  and/or genotype  misclassification  errors. 
Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology. 
Jung, S. and Ahn, C.  (2003). Sample size estimation for GEE 
method for comparing slopes in repeated measurements 
data. Statistics in Medicine 22,  1305-1315. 

Jung,  S.  and  Ahn,  C.  (2005).  Sample  size  for  repeated 
binary measurements using GEE. Statistics in Medicine 
24, 2583-2596. 

Kang,  S.,  Gordon,  D.,  and  Finch,  S.  (2004).  What  SNP 
genotyping errors are most costly for genetic association 
studies? Genetic Epidemiology 26,  132-141. 

Kang,  S.,  Finch,  S.,  Haynes,  C.,  and  Gordon,  D.  (2004). 
Quantifying  the  percent  increase  in  minimum  sample 
size for SNP genotyping errors in genetic model-based 
association studies. Human Heredity 58,  139-144. 

Kang, S., Shin, D., Oh, M., andAhn, C. (2004). An investigation 
on the allelic chi-square test used in genetic association 
studies. Biometrical Jouma/46, 699-706. 

Lachin, J. (1977). Sample size determination for comparative 

trials. Biometrics 33,  315-324. 

Laird,  N.,  Horvath,  S.,  and  Xu,  X.  (2000).  Implementing  a 
unified  approach  to  family  based  tests  of association. 
Genetic Epi.  19,  S36-S42. 

Lalouel, J. and Rohrwasser, A. (2002). Power and replication 
in case-control studies. American Journal of Hypertension 
15, 201-205. 

Mehta, C. and Patel, N. (2006). Statxact 7 with Cytel Studio 

Cytel Software Corporation,  (Cambridge,  MA). 

Mote,  V.L.  and Anderson,  R.L.  (1965).  An  investigation  of 

the  effect  of  misclassification  on  the  properties  of 
chi-square  tests  in  the  analysis  of  categorical  data. 
Biometnka 52,  95-109. 

Odunsi, K., Terry, G., Ho, L., Bell, J., Cuzick, J., and Ganesan, 
T.  (1995).  Association  between  HLA  DQBh03  and 
cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia. Molecular Medicine 1, 
161-171. 

Oesterling, J.E., Cooner, W.H., Jacobsen, S.J., Guess, H.A., 
and Lieber, M.M. (1993).  Influence of patient age on the 
serum PSA concentration. An important dinical observation. 
Uro/.  C/in.  North Am. 20,  671-680. 

PS: Power and sample size calculation. Software webpage is 
http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/twikilbin/view/Main/Power 
SampleSize 

Purcell, S., Cherny, S., and Sham, P.  (2003). Genetic Power 
Calculator:  design  of  linkage  and  association  genetic 
mapping  studies  of  complex  traits.  Bioinforrnatics  19, 
149-150. 

Reveille, J., Moulds, J., Ahn, C.,  Friedman, A., Baethge, B., 
Roseman, J., Stratton, K., and Alarcon, G. (1988). Systemic 
lupus  erythematosus  in  three  ethnic  groups:  I.  The 
II,  C4,  and  CR1  alleles, 
effects  of  HLA  class 
socioeconomic factors,  and  ethnicity  at disease onset. 
LUMINA  Study  Group.  Lupus  in  minority  populations, 
nature versus nurture. Arthritis Rheum 41,  1161-1172. 
Reveille,  J.,  Fischbach,  M.,  McNearney,  T.,  Friedman,  A., 
Aguilar, M.,  Lisse, J.,  Fritzler, M., Ahn, C., Arnett,  F.,  and 
GENISOS Study Group. (2001 ). Systemic sclerosis in 3 US 
ethnic groups: a comparison of clinical, sociodemographic, 
immunogenetic  determinants.  Semin 
serologic,  and 
Arthritis Rheum 30,  332-346. 

Romero, R.,  Kuivaniemi, H., Tromp, G., and Olson, J. (2002). 
The  design,  execution,  and  interpretation  of  genetic 
association studies to decipher complex disease. Am. J. 
Obstet.  Gynecol.  187, 1299-1312. 

Sasieni,  P.  (1997).  From genotypes to genes: Doubling the 

sample size. Biometrics 53,  1253-1261. 

Slager,  S.  and  Schaid,  D.  (2001 ).  Case-control  studies  of 
genetic markers: power and sample size approximations 
for Armitage's test for trend. Human Heredity 52,149-153. 
Sobel,  E.,  Papp,  J.,  and  Lange,  K.  (2002).  Detection  and 
integration  of genotyping  errors  in  statistical  genetics. 
Am.  J.  Hum.  Genet.  70,  496-508. 

Zheng, G., and Tian, X. (2005). The impact of diagnostic error 
on  testing  genetic  association  in  case-control  studies. 
Statistics in Medicine 24, 869-882. 

