Genomics &  lnfonnatics  Vol.  5(1) 24-29, March 2007 

Evaluation of Advanced Structure-Based Virtual Screening 
Methods for Computer-Aided Drug Discovery 

HLi Sun Lee\ Jiwon Choi1 and Sukjoon Yoon1* 

1Department  of Biological  Sciences,  Research  Center  for 
\1\tmen's  Dseases (RC\1\0),  Scri<rnyung \1\tmen's University, 
Seoul  140-742,  Korea 

Abstract 
Computational virtual screening has become an  essential 
platform of drug discoveryforthe efficient identification of 
active candidates. Moleculardocking, a keytechnologyof 
receptor-centric virtual  screening,  is commonly used to 
predict the binding  affinities  of chemical  compounds on 
target receptors.  Despite the advancement and extensive 
application ofthese methods, substantial improvement is 
still required to increase their accuracy and time-efficiency. 
Here,  we  evaluate  several  advanced  structure-based 
virtual screening approaches for elucidating the rank-order 
activity of chemical libraries, and the quantitative structure(cid:173)
activity relationship  (QSAR).  Our  results  show that the 
ensemble-average free energy estimation, induding implicit 
solvation  energy  tenns,  significantly  improves  the  hit 
enrichment ofthe virtual screening. VVe also demonstrate 
that  the  assignment  of quantum  mechanical-polarized 
(OM-polarized) partial charges to docked ligands contributes 
to the  reproduction  of the crystal  pose of ligands in  the 
docking and scoring procedure. 

KsyKozfs.· virtual screening, docking and scoring, QSAR, 
drug discovery 

Introduction 
Ole ofthe major challenges in  drug discovery is to identify 
novel compounds vvith  biological activity. Computer-aided 
drug discovery technology has become an essential and 
powerful platfonn forthe discovery of new lead compounds, 
as an alternative from, and complement to experimental 
approaches. As the number of high resolution structures 
of potential therapeutic targets and small molecules has 
grOV\IIl, the significance of in si/ico experimental approaches 
has become  increasingly important as demonstrated in 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yoonsj@sookmyung.ac.kr 
Tel  +82-2-71 0-9415, Fax +82-2-2077-7322 
Accepted  17  Jan  2007 

recent studies by making use of public data (Cherkasov 
eta/., 2006; Cleves and  Jain, 2006; Yoon eta/., 2005a; b). 
Virtual high-throughput screening (Klebe, 2006; qJrea 
and  Matter,  2004), vvhich  is  a method to rapidly identify 
biologically  active  compounds  in  si/ico,  can  be  roughly 
divided into two  categories; ligand-centric and receptor(cid:173)
centric.  Ligand-centric methods essentially focus on  the 
comparative  analysis  of  the  structural  shapes  and 
chemical  complementarities  between  compounds  and 
knOWlligands. A knovvledge ofthe experimentally selected 
active  compounds  is  a  prerequisite  vvhen  using  this 
approach (Stahura and Bajorath, 2004). Receptor-centric 
methods predict the interaction of given compounds vvith 
a target receptor, and hence they do not require experimental 
data about the structure ofthe ligand. Molecular docking 
is one ofthe key methodologies for receptor-centric virtual 
screening. It is a technique for predicting the best binding 
mode for a given compound that fits into a target receptor, 
and evaluating its binding affinity. The docking approach 
has  become  a  primary  technique  used  in  many  drug 
discovery programs (Kitchen €t  a/., 2004; Sousa eta/., 2006). 
The docking process involves a confonnational search 
for a compound vvhich complements a target binding site, 
with the aim of identifying the best-matching binding pose. 
A common  computational  strategy is to  use  a suitable 
scoring  function  to  theoretically  evaluate  the  binding 
affinities ofthousands of molecules in a compound library 
for a target protein. An  accurate rank-ordered prediction 
of  the  compound  binding  affinities  using  the  scoring 
function  is an  invaluable step.  Most of scoring functions 
used in docking programs are designed to predict binding 
affinity by evaluating the interaction between a compound 
and a receptor. However, it should be noted that ligand(cid:173)
receptor recognition  process  is  determined not  only by 
enthalpic effects but also by entropic effects. Moreover, the 
scoring functions  have  a simplified form for the  energy 
function to facilitate high-throughput evaluation of a large 
number  of compounds  in  a single  docking  run.  These 
functions may be problematic vvtlen used vvfth contemporary 
docking programs, and can result in a decrease of virtual 
screening  accuracy.  To  overcome  this  problem,  more 
precise but time-consuming computational methodologies 
are necessary. 

There have been  a number of reports evaluating the 
efficiency of various virtual screening approaches, including 
the evaluation of docking programs (Warren eta/., 2006), 
machine-learning methods for ligand-based descriptors 

Evaluation of Advanced Structure-Based Virtual  Screening Methods for Computer-Aided Drug Discovery 

25 

(Chen eta/., 2007) and comparison of shape-matching vvith 
docking  (Havvkins  eta/.,  2007).  Here,  we  describe and 
evaluate several recep:or-cenbic CCllllJUtational methodologies 
vvflich are applicable for use in drug discovery applications. 
We focus on accurate docking and rank-ordering for the 
improvement  of the  predictability  of biologically  active 
compounds. 

between a receptor and a ligand. MM-GBSA is a method 
that  combines  OPLS  molecular  mechanics  energies 
(EMM), surface generalized Born solvation model for polar 
solvation ( G3GB), and a nonpolar solvation tenn (GNP). The 
GNP  term  comprises  the  nonpolar  solvent  accessible 
surface area and van derV\/aals interactions. The total free 
energy of binding is calculated as: 

Overview of the  Methodologies Tested 
in This Study 
We  applied  several  computational  solutions  from  the 
Schrtidinger  software  package  (Schrtidinger,  LLC: 
Portland, OR). A brief overview of these methodologies 
is presented. 

Glide Docking 
We used the Glide program (Friesneret a/., 2004) as our 
docking engine. The Glide docking algorithm performs a 
series of hierarchical  searches for locations of possible 
ligand affinity vvithin the binding site of a receptor. A rough 
positioning  and  scoring  algorithm  is  applied  during the 
in~ial search step, followed by torsional energy optimization 
on  an  OPLA-AA  non-bonded  potential  energy  grid  for 
enduring candidate poses. The pose confonnations ofthe 
very best candidates are further refined by using  Monte 
Carlo  sampling.  Selection  of the  final  docked  pose  is 
accomplished using a Glide score, vvflich is a model energy 
function  that  combines  empirical  and  force-field-based 
tenns. The Glide score is a modified and extended version 
of the ChemScore function  (Eldridge eta/., 1997). 

MJI6-I..iglnl Bll11lieaJ!r.-v.ilh Eneogetics 
(eMlrA<:E) 
The  eMBrAcE  (MacroMode/  v9.1)  program  calculates 
binding  energies  between  ligands  and  receptors  using 
molecular  mechanics  energy  minimization  for  docked 
confonnations. eMBrAcE applies multiple minimizations, 
during vvhich each ofthe specified pre-positioned ligands 
is minimized with the receptor. For the energy-minimized 
structures, the calculation is perfonned first on the receptor 
(Eprctem),  then  on  the  ligand  (EJgand),  and  finally  on  the 
complex (Ewrnpi9x). The energy difference is then calculated 
as: 

tiE= Ecomp!ex- Et1garxi- Eprclem 

Prime MM-GBSA 
This application is used to predict the free binding energy 

LiGbim = Gcompiex- (Gprote~n + GJgarxi) 
G= EMM  + GsGB +GNP 

Ualson 
The  Liaison  (Liaison v4.0) program is an  application for 
estimating  the  binding  affinities  between  ligands  and 
receptors, using a linear interaction  approximation (LIA) 
model. The LIAmodel is an empirical method fitted to a set 
of knovvn  binding free  energies.  Liaison  runs molecular 
mechanics  (MM)  simulations  for  the  ligand-receptor 
complex, and for the free ligand and free receptor using 
the surface generalized Born (SGB) continuum solvation 
model. The simulation data and empirical binding affinities 
are analyzed to generate the  Liaison parameters, vvhich 
are subsequently used to predict binding energies for other 
ligands with  the  same  receptor.  The  empirical  function 
used by Liaison for the prediction of binding affinities is as 
follows. 

LIG~ o I ( 0:,~ )- ( u~~) I +~I ( YJ" )- ( uj") I 

+71 ( U:"" )- ( ufo") I 

In this equation,  (  ) , band frepresent the ensemble 
average, the bound form, and the free fonn ofthe ligand, 
respectively.  Parameters a,  j3  andy are the coefficients. 
Uvdw,  Uetec  and  Ucw  are the van  der Waals,  electrostatic 
and cavity energy terms in the SGB model, respectively. 

OM-Polarized Ligand Docking (QPLD) 
The OM-Polarized Ligand Docking (OPLD) protocol is an 
improved docking method, vvhich  incorporates quantum 
mechanical  and  molecular  mechanical 
(OM/MM) 
calculations (Cho eta/., 2005). This method applies the 
Glide algorithm to generate the best candidate poses for 
ligand docking. The  partial  charges on  the atoms of the 
ligand are then  replaced vvith  charges derived from OM 
calculations on the ligand in the field ofthe receptor for each 
ligand-receptor complex. The charges are calculated from 
the  electrostatic potential  energy surface  of the  ligand, 
vvhich  is generated from a single-point calculation  using 
the BL YP density function for the OM region. Glide then 
re-docks each of the ligands with updated atom charges, 

26  Genomics &  lnfonnatics  Vol.  5(1) 24-29, March 2007 

and returns the most energetically favorable pose. 

the standard mode of Glide docking (Glide SP 4.0). 

Materials and Methods 
Preparation of the Receptor 
Two receptor co-crystal  structures,  estrogen  receptor a 
(ERa,  PDB  entry:  3ERD)  and  peroxisome  proliferator(cid:173)
activated receptory (PPARy,  PDB entry: 1 KNU), both  of 
vvhich  belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily, were 
used in this study. The coordinates for these proteins were 
obtained from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (httpJ/WoNW. 
rcsb.org/pdb). 

Preparation of the Ugands 
We  obtained  the  SMILES  representation  of  232  test 
compounds, forvvhich the experimental binding affinities 
were taken from published data (Blair eta/., 2000; Hong 
et  a/.,  2002).  The  experimental  binding  affinities  were 
represented as log(RBA) (Yo on and V\lelsh, 2004), vvflere 
RBA refers to the relative binding affinity and log(RBA) is 
defined  as the  logarithm  of the  percent ratio of the  ICffi 
between  17p.estradiol and a test  compound.  Thus,  the 
RBA of 17f)-estradiol is 100, and log(RBA) of 17$-estradiol 
is 2. V\le then generated 3D energy-minimized conformations 
ofthese compounds using the LigPrep program (LigPrep 
11.2.0, Schrtidinger, LLC: Portland, OR.). Compounds with 
atom  types  that  were  not  recognized  by  LigPrep  were 
eliminated from the test set This resulted in the retention 
of 173 of the original232 compounds. 

The Glide Docking Protocol 
For Glide docking,  PDB co-crystal structures of ERa and 
PPARywere prepared using the Maestro interface of the 
Schrtidinger software package. All water molecules were 
removed, and multimeric complexes were simplified from 
the PDB structures. Prior to molecular docking, receptor 
structures were preprocessed using protein  preparation 
and refinement components in the Glide docking package. 
Hydrogen atoms were added by applying an all-atom force 
field. Side chains that were not close to the ligand binding 
site and did not participate in  salt bridges were neutralized. 
A restrained minimization using the OPLS-AA force field 
was  perionned  to  refine  the  complex  structure.  This 
procedure  reorients  side-chain  hydroxyl  groups,  and 
alleviates  potential  steric  clashes.  The  minimization 
process was continued until the average  RMS deviation 
of the non-hydrogen atoms reached the specified limit of 
0.3 A.  Olce receptor grid files  had  been  generated,  all 
compounds were docked to the receptor structures using 

Ugand  &  structure-Based  Descriptors  (L.SBD) 
Protocol 
The eMBrAcE, Prime MM-GBSAand Liaison calculations 
were  perfonned  using  the  Ligand  &  Structure-Based 
Descriptors (LSBD) application ofthe Schrtidinger software 
package. These calculations were applied the ligand-recep:or 
complex structures obtained from Glide docking. 

The OM-Polarized Ugand Docking Protocol 
The grid for QPLD was set up as a grid file in PPARy using 
the grid generation data from the previous Glide standard 
docking operation. The ligand to be QPLD-docked was 
prepared from  the  cognate ligand  bound  in  PPARy. An 
energy-minimized confonnation of the extracted cognate 
ligand  was  generated  using  LigPrep.  The  level  of 
quantum-mechanical treatment was set up as Fast mode. 

Results and Discussion 
One  of  the  key  challenges  in  computer-aided  drug 
discovery is to maximize the capabilities of the method in 
use for predicting and rank-ordering the binding affinities 
of compounds fora given target protein. The efficiency of 
a prediction method is predominantly detennined by these 
capabilities.  Various  descriptors  extracted  from  the 
structural  information  on  ligand-receptor complex  may 
provide an  advantageous solution to creating a reliable 
binding-affinity-prediction model. Here, we combined the 
results  obtained from  a standard  docking  protocol  with 
data from three different structure-based descriptors, and 
then  investigated  the  utility of these  descriptors  on  the 
virtual  screening efficiency for ERa ligands (Fig. 1 ).  The 
virtual  screening  efficiency  was  compared  using  an 
analysis of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves 
(Hand eta/., 2001 ). A ROC curve describes the tradeoff 
between  sensitivity and specificity, vvhere the sensitivity 
is  defined  as  the  ability  of  the  model  to  avoid  false 
negatives, and the specificity relates to its ability to avoid 
false positives. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) is 
a measure of the test acruracy. For example, an AUCvalue 
of  0.5  represents  a  random  prediction,  vvhereas  1.0 
represents a perfect prediction. 

For a total  of 94 true  positives vvith  log(RBA) > -4.0 
(corresponding to> 200 J.tM activity), AUC values ranged 
narrovvly  from  0.71  to  0.75,  depending  on  the  scoring 
methods  tested.  The  standard  docking  scoring  (Glide 
score in the figure) method having 0.75 AUC could slightly 
enrich the virtual screening, and was better than the other 

Evaluation of Advanced Structure-Based Virtual  Screening Methods for Computer-Aided Drug Discovery 

27 

(a) 

100 

80 

tJ)  60 
(!) 
> 
·-e 
<(  40 

20 

0 

(b) 

100 

80 

(!) 

tJ)  60 
> ·-e 
<(  40 

20 

0 

-Glide score, 0.75 
-eMBrAcE,  0.71 
MM-GBSA,  0.74 
-LiaScore,  0.72 

-Glide score, 0.72 
-eMBrAcE,  0.74 
MM-GBSA,  0.61 
LiaScore,  0.82 

-

0 

20 

40 
60 
Inactives 

80 

100 

0 

20 

40 
60 
Inactives 

80 

100 

(c) 

100 

80 

tJ)  60 
(!) 
> 
·-e 
<(  40 

20 

0 

-Glide score, 0.77 
-eMBrAcE,  0.75 
MM-GBSA,  0.55 
-LiaScore,  0.89 

0 

20 

40 
60 
Inactives 

80 

100 

Fig.  1.  Virtual  screening  efficiency  of  four  different  scoring  methods  on  ERa  ligands;  standard  Glide  docking  (Glide  score), 
Multi-Ligand  Bimolecular  Association  with  Energetics  (eMBrAcE),  Prime  MM-GBSA  calculation  (MM-GBSA)  and  Liaison 
calculation  (LiaScore).  (a) 94 true positives with log(RBS) > -4.0,  (b) 43 true positives with  log(RBS) > -2.0,  (c)  13 true positives 
with log(RBS) > 0.0 out of a total  of 173 compounds.  The calculated AUC values are included in the insets. 

descriptor-combined scoring methods (Fig. 1 a). In Figure 
1 b we applied a more stringent definition of "active" versus 
"inactive" compounds. Since -10 1-LM  activity is generally 
the minimum required to identify initial lead compounds in 
drug discovery programs,  we set log(RBA) > -2 as the 
cutoff, which corresponds to a 10-1 00 1-LM activity for ERa. 
In this case the Liaison scoring method (LiaScore in the 
figure)  significantly  improved  the  efficiency  of  virtual 
screening. On the other hand the Prime MM-GBSA method 
(MM-GBSA  in  Figure)  showed  the  lowest  level  of 
enrichment  of  the  process.  An  even  more  stringent 
definition of log(RBA) > 0,  corresponding to the binding 
affinity in a nanomolar activity range, can indicate a lead 
compound as being 'promising' in general drug discovery 
terms.  At  this  cutoff  value  only  13  compounds  were 
classified as active. The overall trends in the graphs were 
similar to the graphs of log(RBA) > -2 cutoff. The virtual 

screening efficiency was generally improved, except in the 
case of the MM-GBSA scoring method (Fig.  1 c).  These 
results indicate that methodologies with a better prediction 
precision in binding affinities, though more time-consuming, 
can provide a significant advantage in prioritizing candidate 
compounds with high biological activity (low micromolar 
or nanomolar activity). Among the scoring methods tested, 
the  Prime  MM-GBSA method showed  a relatively poor 
prediction capability when screening the compounds with 
high binding affinities. 

Obtaining  accurate  structural  information  on  the 
binding pose of a ligand at a binding site is essential to the 
design of optimized lead compounds in computer-aided 
drug discovery. An accurate calculation of atomic partial 
charges of a ligand in the field ofthe receptor would result 
in improved docking results. We tested whether charges 
obtained from the QM/MM calculation for ligand/PPARy 

28  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  5(1) 24-29,  March 2007 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 2.  Overlapped docking poses of a cognate ligand at the binding site of PPARy obtained from (a) Glide docking (RMSD = 2.17 
A)  and  (b)  QPLD  (RMSD = 0.86 A).  In  this figure the conformations of the  ligand  in the co-crystal  structure (purple),  from  Glide 
docking (brown) and from  QPLD (yellow),  are represented. 

(a) 

(b) 

-0.56 

Fig.  3.  Comparison  between  (a)  force-field  charges  and  (b)  quantum  mechanical  charges  for the  PPARy cognate  ligand  from  standard  Glide 
docking and QPLD docking. 

structure  would  provide  a  more  precise  binding  pose 
compared to the standard docking method, which relies 
on the default force-field charges. The results of a standard 
docking run and a QPLD run for a cognate ligand of PPARy 
are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  RMSD  (Root  Mean  Square 
Deviation) value between crystal and docked poses of the 
cognate ligand was 2.17 A from the standard docking run, 
while the QPLD method returned a significantly improved 
RMSD value of 0.86 A. Atomic charge values in parts of 
the ligand structure were revealed (Fig. 3). We confirmed 
the existence of significant changes in partial charges by 
using  the  QM/MM  calculation  of the  QPLD  run.  These 
results indicate that polarization effects induced by the field 
of the receptor can significantly affect the final conformation 
of a ligand bound to PPARy. \J\/e have therefore demonstrated 
that an additional process of calculating subtle changes 
in  charges,  by  incorporating  environmental  polarization 
effects,  considerably  improves the  accuracy  of docking 
predictions. 

In  this article we have  introduced  several  advanced 
C0f1"111ter-aided drug discovery rrethodologies fer receptor-entric 

virtual screening. We have evaluated their reliability using 
a set of test ligands and two receptor structures belonging 
to the nuclear receptor superfamily. Our data suggest that 
some of these methodologies significantly improve virtual 
screening efficiency by better prioritizing active compounds, 
and  by  more  precisely reproducing  the  crystal  pose  of 
cognate  ligands.  Although  the  current  study  does  not 
involve  a  large  number  of  receptors  and  test  sets  of 
compounds,  our  evaluation  data  should  add  valuable 
information that may enhance the practice of computer(cid:173)
ased drug discovery. 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  Dr.  Weida  Tong 
(National Center for Toxicological Research,  U.S.  Food 
& Drug Administration,  Jefferson,  AR) for providing the 
experimental  data  set  and  2D  structures  of  Estrogen 
Receptor  compounds  which  were  used  in  this  study. 
This  research  was supported  by  Sookmyung Women's 
University Research Grants 1-0603-0020. 

Evaluation of Advanced Structure-Based Virtual  Screening Methods for Computer-Aided Drug  Discovery 

2g 

References 
Blair,  R. M.,  Fang, H.,  Branham, W  S.,  Hass,  B.S., Dial,  S. 
L.,  Moland,  C.  L.,  Tong,  W,  Shi,  L.,  Perkins,  R.,  and 
Sheehan,  D.  M.  (2000).  The estrogen  receptor relative 
binding  affinities  of  188  natural  and  xenochemicals: 
structural diversity of ligands.  Toxicol.  Sci.  54,  138-153. 
Chen,  B.,  Harrison,  R.  F.,  Papadatos, G., Willett,  P., V\/ood, 
D.  J.,  Lewell, X.  0., Greenidge,  P.,  and Stiefl,  N. (2007). 
Evaluatioo of machine-learning methods for ligand-based 
virtual  screening.  Journal of computer-aided rrolecular 
design 21,  53-62. 

Cherkasov, A.,  Ban,  F.,  Li, Y.,  Fallahi, M.,  and Hammond, G. 
L.  (2006). Progressive docking: a hybrid QSAR/docking 
approach  for  accelerating  in  silica  high  throughput 
screening. Journal ci medicinal cherristry49, 7466-7478. 
Cho, A.  E.,  Guallar, V.,  Berne,  B. J.,  and Friesner,  R. (2005). 
Importance  of accurate  charges  in  molecular  docking: 
Quantum  mechanical/molecular  mechanical  (QM/MM) 
approach. J.  Comput.  Chern.  26,915-931. 

Cleves,  A.  E.  and Jain,  A.  N.  (2006).  Robust ligand-based 
modeling  of  the  biological  targets  of  known  drugs. 
Journal of medicinal chemistry 49,  2921-2938. 

Eldridge,  M.D., Murray,  C. W, Auton,  T.  R.,  Paolini,  G. V., 
and  Mee,  R.  P.  (1997).  Empirical  scoring  functions:  I. 
The development of a fast empirical scoring function to 
estimate  the  binding  affinity  of  ligands  in  receptor 
complexes. Journal of computer-aided rroleculardesign 
11, 425-445. 

Friesner,  R.A.,  Banks,  J.  L.,  Murphy,  R.  B.,  Halgren, T.A., 
Klicic,  J.  J.,  Mainz,  D.  T.,  Repasky,  M.  P.,  Knoll,  E.  H., 
Shelley,  M.,  Perry,  J.  K.,  Shaw,  D.  E.,  Francis,  P.,  and 
Shenkin,  P.  S.  (2004). Glide:  a new approach for rapid, 
accurate docking and scoring. 1. Method and assessment 
of docking accuracy. Journal of medicinalchernistry47, 
1739-1749. 

Hand,  D., Mannila, H., and Smyth,  P. (2001). PrincipesofData 

Mining.  (Cambridge,  Massachsells: The MIT Press). 

Hawkins,  P.  C.,  Skillman,  A.  G.,  and  Nicholls,  A.  (2007). 
Comparison  of shape-matching and  docking as virtual 

screening  tools.  Journal  of medicinal  chemistry  50, 
74-82. 

Hong,  H.,  Tong,  W,  Fang,  H.,  Shi,  L.,  Xie,  0.,  \1\hJ,  J., 
Perkins,  R.,  V\/alker,  J.  D.,  Branham, W.,  and Sheehan, 
D.  M. (2002). Prediction of estrogen receptor binding for 
58,000  chemicals  using  an  integrated  system  of  a 
tree-based model  with  structural  alerts.  ErMronmental 
health perspectives 110,  29-36. 

Kitchen,  D.  B.,  Decornez,  H.,  Furr,  J.  R.,  and  Bajorath,  J. 
(2004). Docking and scoring in virtual screening for drug 
discovery:  methods  and  applications.  Nat.  Rev.  Drug 
Discov.  3,  935-949. 

Klebe,  G.  (2006).  Virtual  ligand  screening:  strategies, 
perspectives  and  limitations.  Drug  Discov.  Today  11, 
580.594. 

Q:>rea, T.  I.  and Matter, H. (2004). lntegating virtual screening 

in lead discovery.  Curr.  Opin.  Chem  Bioi.  8,  349-358. 

Sousa,  S.  F.,  Fernandes,  P.  A.,  and Ramos,  M.  J.  (2006). 
future 

Protein-ligand  docking:  current  status  and 
challenges. Proteins 65,  15-26. 

Stahura,  F.  L.  and  Bajcrath,  J.  (2004).  Virtual  screening 
methods  that  complement  HTS.  Comb.  Chem  High 
Throughput Screen.  7,  259-269. 

V\/arren,  G.  L.,  Andrews,  C.  W,  Capelli,  A.  M.,  Clarke,  B., 
Lalonde,  J.,  Lambert,  M.  H.,  Lindvall,  M.,  Nevins,  N., 
Serrus,  S.  F.,  Senger,  S.,  Tedesco,  G.,  V\/all,  I.  D., 
Woolven, J. M.,  Peishoff, C.  E.,  and Head, M.S. (2006). 
A critical  assessment of docking programs and scoring 
functions. Journal of medicinal cherristry49, 5912-5931. 
Yooo,  S.,  Smellie, A., Hartsough,  D.,  and Filikov, A. (2005a). 
Corrputational  identificatioo  of proteins  for  selectivity 
assays. Proteins 59,  434-443. 

Yoon,  S.,  Smellie,  A.,  Hartsough,  D.,  and  FilikOv',  A. 
(2005b).  Surrogate  docking:  structure-based  virtual 
screening at high throughput speed. Journal of corrputer(cid:173)
aided rroleculardesign 19,483-497. 

Yoon,  S.  and  V\/elsh,  W  J.  (2004).  Identification  of  a 
minimal  subset of receptor conformations for  improved 
multiple cooformation  docking and two-step scoring.  J. 
Chern.  lnf.  Comput.  Sci.  44,  88-96. 

