APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  157-159,  September  2008

A  Simple  and  Fast  Web  Alignment  Tool  for  Large  Amount  of 
Sequence  Data

Yong  Seok  Lee*,¶  and  Jeongsu  Oh¶

Korean  Bioinformation  Center,  Korea  Research  Institute 
of  Bioscience  and  Biotechnology,  Daejeon  305-806, 
Korea

Abstract

Multiple  sequence  alignment  (MSA)  is  the  most  im-
portant  step  for  many  of  biological  sequence  analyses, 
homology  search,  and  protein  structural  assignments. 
However,  large  amount  of  data  make  biologists  difficult 
to  perform  MSA  analyses  and  it  requires  much  compu-
tational  time  to  align  many  sequences.  Here,  we  have 
developed  a  simple  and  fast  web  alignment  tool  for 
aligning, editing, and visualizing large amount of sequence 
data. We used a cluster server installed ClustalW-MPI  us-
ing  web  services  and  message  passing  interface  (MPI). 
It  also  enables  users  to  edit  multiple  sequence  align-
ments  for  manual  editing  and  to  download  the  input  da-
ta  and  results  such  as  alignments  and  phylogenetic  tree. 

Availability:  A  web  services  is  freely  available  at  http:// 
www.koreanbio.org/ClustalwMPI/.

Keywords:  alignment,  ClustalW-MPI,  large  data,  Jalview, 
parallel  process

Introduction

The  multiple  alignment  of  biological  sequences  has  a 
long  history  and  is  used  to  identify  regions  of  homology 
that  shows  functional,  structural,  or  evolutionary  relation-
ships  between  the  sequences.  Many  multiple  sequence 
alignment  (MSA)  programs  have  been  development  by 
bioinformatists  in  the  past.  ClustalW  (Thompson  et al., 
1994)  is  perhaps  the  most  widely  used  MSA  program 
due  to  its  speed.  Also,  as  a  single  standalone  algorithm, 
it  is  easy  to  run  in  a  computer  especially  in  UNIX  and 
Linux  environments.  Recently,  massively  large  sequence 
data  are  generated  due  to  the  technical  advancement  of 
sequencing.  For  aligning  large  number  of  sequences, 

¶Yong  Seok  Lee  and  Jeongsu  Oh  contributed  equally  to  this 
work.
*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  dolsemtl@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8511,  Fax  +82-42-879-8519
Accepted  9  September  2008

several  parallel  alignment  programs  have  been  reported 
(Ebedes  and  Datta,  2004;  Kleinjung et al.,  2002;  Li  2003; 
Mikhailov et al.,  2001).  Kleinjumg et al.  (2002)  is  based 
on  the  so-called  a  parallel  progressive  alignment  strat-
egy  without  a  guide  tree.  Mikhailov  et al.  (1993)  de-
signed  a  method  for  shared-memory  multiprocessor 
machines.  Usually,  these  machines  have  commodity 
parallel  architectures  and  are  expensive.  While  Ebedes 
and  Datta  (2004)  and  Li  (2003)  reported  a  parallelization 
of  the  ClustalW  on  a  workstation  cluster  using  the  mes-
sage  passing  interface  (MPI;  MPI  site,  2008).  It  has  a 
smaller  network  bandwidth  and  longer  message  latency. 
However,  single  or  multiple  CPU  ClustalW  programs  are 
usually  not  suitable  for  most  biologists  who  are  not 
used  to  UNIX  systems.
    Web  based  applications  have  many  advantages  in 
that  they  can  reach  large  number  of  users.  There  is  no 
need  to  install  programs,  and  it  is  easier  to  update  and 
manage  than  to  maintain  desktop  applications  (Shin  et 
al.,  2008;  Woo et al.,  2007).  However,  some  web  appli-
cations  are  dependent  on  specific  web  browsers,  so 
they  are  incompatible  with  some  web  browsers.  When 
a  web  alignment  tool  becomes  more  useful  to  operate 
if  it  is  implemented  following  the  W3C  recommended 
XHTML  1.0  Transitional  DTD  standard  and  does  not  use 
technologies 
that  are  dependent  on  specific  web 
browsers.  This  is  one  way  to  make  a  web  alignment 
tool  more  compatible  with  many  web  browsers.
    We  have  developed  a  user-friendly  a  web  based 
alignment  tool  based  on  ClustalW-MPI  program.  It  is 
standard  and  easy  to  maintain.  This  web  tool  will  help 
researchers  to  carry  out  multiple  sequence  alignment 
with  a  large  number  of  input  accompanies  by  a  viewer 
and  an  editing  function.  It  also  enables  users  to  down-
load  the  results  and  do  basic  analyses  such  as  building 
trees  and  sequence  clustering.

Features  and  Results

In  order  to  use  alignment  tools,  most  advanced  users 
use  UNIX  or  Linux  commands  and  options  directly  in  a 
console  window.  It  is  very  inconvenient  to  use.  It  also 
can  cause  frequent  mistakes.  A  web  alignment  tool  can 
be  executed  through  a  GUI  environment  on  the  web 
page  by  selecting  commands  and  options.  Our  web 
alignment  tool  has  the  following  features;  input,  down-
loadable  output,  and  visualization. 
    Users  input  multiple  sequences  in  the  web  alignment 

158    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(3)  157-159,  September  2008

Fig.  1.  (A)  An  example  main  input 
page.  Users  can  paste  in  or  up-
load  sequences  to  carry  out  the 
alignment  program.  (B)  An  exam-
ple  main  output  page.  (C)  Com-
parison  of  running  time  and  speed-
ups  between  parallel  and  non-par-
allel  systems.  We  ran  the  align-
ment  program  with  mitochondrial 
COX1  gene  on 
the  ten  widely 
varying  test  data  with  1537  bases. 
X-axis  indicates  the  number  of  in-
put  sequences.  Y-axis 
indicates 
the  running  time  in  seconds.  We 
showed  the  results  for  two  running 
time  comparison  with  a  parallel 
system  against  a  non-parallel  of 
ClustalW-MPI.

tool  first  (Fig.  1A).  It  supports  two  types  of  input  data: 
1)  copy  &  paste  and  2)  file  uploading.  Users  set  the  op-
tions  as  for  ClustalW  in  the  option  panel.  The  web  align-
ment  tool  provides  all  the  options  for  ClustalW. 
    By  clicking  the  run  button  to  activate  ClustalW-MPI  af-
ter  users  finish  inputting  the  sequence  and  setting  the 
options,  the  users  will  see  a  wait  dialog  window.  At  this 
point,  the  web  server  sends  the  input  sequence  data 
and  options  that  are  set  by  the  users  to  a  CPU  cluster 
that  is  installed  with  ClustalW-MPI.  The  CPU  cluster  ma-
chine  receives  request  from  the  web  part  to  execute 
ClustalW-MPI,  and  then  returns  the  result  to  the  web 
server.  All  the  communication  between  the  web  server 
and  the  CPU  cluster  machine  is  through  the  web  serv-
ices  technology.  Web  alignment  tool  offers  three  down-
loadable  types  of  the  outputs  after  finishing  each  job: 
Alignment  file,  Guide  tree  file,  and  Input  file  (Fig.  1B).  In 

the  web  alignment  tool,  users  can  download  files  easily 
through  the  web  page.  The  web  alignment  tool  shows 
the  same  output  printed  in  consol  screen. 
    Web  alignment  tool  also  offers  a  Jalview  applet  for 
editing  and  visualizing  the  outputs  on  the  result  web 
page  by  clicking  start  Jalview  button  on  the  result  web 
page  (Fig.  1B).  Jalview  is  widely  used  multiple  sequence 
alignment  editor  in  the  world.  This  applet  enables  users 
to  edit,  view,  and  perform  a  basic  analysis  such  as 
drawing  a  tree  and  the  removal  of  sequences,  exporting 
the  results,  and  so  on.

System  and  Implementation

The  web  alignment  tool  is  divided  into  two  parts:  1)  web 
part  and  2)  ClustalW-MPI  part.  The  web  part  is  con-
structed  by  CodeIgniter  php  framework  (CodeIgniter 

A  Simple  and  Fast  Web  Alignment  Tool  for  Large  Sequence  Data    159

site,  2008)  as  a  web  server  and  web  services  client.  It 
runs  on  the  Linux  operating  system.  The  web  part  sends 
the  request  to  a  CPU  cluster  server  installed  with 
ClustalW-MPI,  upon  receiving  a  request  from  a  user  on 
the  web  browser.  The  ClustalW-MPI  part  is  constructed 
by  java  6.0  and  xfire  SOAP  framework  (XFIRE  site, 
2008)  as  web-services  to  run  ClustalW-MPI.  It  runs  on 
a  cluster  machine  installed  with  rocks-cluster  which  has 
20  nodes  (Rocksclusters  site,  2008)  in  KOBIC  (Korean 
Bioinformation  Center).  When  the  ClustalW-MPI  part  is 
invoked  from  the  web  part,  it  executes  ClustalW-MPI, 
and  then  returns  the  result  to  the  web  part.

Performance  of  Web  Alignment  Tool

Our  test  was  run  with  the  mitochondrial  COX1  gene.  We 
showed  the  result  in  Figure  1.  Ten  widely  varying  inputs 
from  ten  to  100  sequences  are  shown  in  X-axis.  Y-axis 
indicates  the  running  time  of  an  individual  input.  One  in-
put  was  run  in  a  common  web  alignment  tool  without 
a  parallel  CPU  system.  The  other  was  run  in  our  web 
alignment  tool  in  a  parallel  CPU  system  using  web  serv-
ices  and  an  MPI  system.  We  found  that  the  running 
time  increased  exponentially  in  a  single  CPU  system, 
while  the  running  time  of  all  the  varying  size  inputs  was 
below  than  100  seconds  in  the  parallel  CPU  system  that 
runs  ClustalW-MPI.

Acknowledgements

This  research  was  supported  by  a  grant  from  the 
Korean  Research  Institute  of  Bioscience  and  Biotechno-
logy  (KRIBB)  Research  Initiative  Program.

Reference

Ebedes,  J.,  and  Datta,  A.  (2004).  Multiple  sequence  align-
ment  in  parallel  on  a  workstation  cluster.  Bioinformatics 
20,  1193-1195.

Kleinjung,  J.,  Douglas,  N.,  and  Heringa,  J.  (2002).  Paralleliz-

ed  multiple  alignment.  Bioinformatics  18,  1270-1271.

Li,  K.B.  (2003).  ClustalW-MPI:  ClustalW  analysis  using  dis-
tributed  and  parallel  computing.  Bioinformatics  19,  1585- 
1586.

Mikhailov,  D.,  Cofer,  H.,  and  Gomperts,  R.  (2001).  Perfor-
mance  optimization  of  ClustalW:  parallel  ClustalW,  HT 
Clustal,  and  MULTICLUSTAL.  White  papers,  Silicon 
Graphics,  Mountain  View,  CA.

Shin,  J.,  Park,  H.,  Ahn,  Y.,  Cho,  D.,  Kim,  J.,  Kee,  M.,  Kim, 
S.,  Lee,  J.,  and  Kim,  S.  (2008).  GTVseq:  a  web-based 
genotyping  tool  for  viral  sequences.  Genomics & Infor-
matics  6,  54-56.

Thompson,  J.D.,  Higgins,  D.G.,  and  Gibson,  T.J.  (1994). 
CLUSTAL  W:  improving  the  sensitivity  of  progressive 
multiple  sequence  alignment  through  sequence  weighting, 
position-specific  gap  penalties  and  weight  matrix  choice. 
Nucleic Acids Res.  22,  4673-4680.

Woo,  T.,  Kim,  Y.,  Kwon,  J.,  and  Seo,  J.  (2007).  RepWeb:  a 
literatures. 

repeat-related 

for 

web-based  search 
Genomics & Informatics  5,  89-91.

tool 

Websites

CodeIgniter  (2008).  http://www.coldscripts.com/
XFIRE  site.  (2008).  http://xfire.codehaus.org/
Rocksclusters  site.  (2008).  http://www.rocksclusters.org
MPI  site.  (2008).  http://www-unix.mcs.anl.gov/mpi/

