Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  173-180,  December  2008

Identification  and  Characterization  of  Human  Genes  Targeted 
by  Natural  Selection

Ha-Jung  Ryu1,  Young  Joo  Kim2,  Young-Kyu 
Park2,  Jae-Jung  Kim1,  Mi-Young  Park1,  Eul-Ju 
Seo3,  Han-Wook  Yoo3,  In-Sook  Park3,  Bermseok 
Oh4  and  Jong-Keuk  Lee1,3*

1Asan  Institute  for  Life  Sciences,  University  of  Ulsan 
College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  138-736,  Korea,  2KRIBB, 
Daejeon  305-806,  Korea,  3Genome  Research  Center  for 
Birth  Defects  and  Genetic  Disorders,  Asan  Medical 
Center,  University  of  Ulsan  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul 
138-736,  Korea,  4Department  of  Biomedical  Engineer-
ing,  Kyung  Hee  University  School  of  Medicine,  Seoul 
130-702,  Korea

Abstract

The  human  genome  has  evolved  as  a  consequence  of 
evolutionary  forces,  such  as  natural  selection.  In  this 
study,  we  investigated  natural  selection  on  the  human 
genes  by  comparing  the  numbers  of  nonsynonymous 
(NS)  and  synonymous  (S)  mutations  in  individual  genes. 
We  initially  collected  all  coding  SNP  data  of  all  human 
genes  from  the  public  dbSNP.  Among  the  human  genes, 
we  selected  3  different  selection  groups  of  genes:  pos-
itively  selected  genes  (NS/S≥3),  negatively  selected 
genes  (NS/S≤1/3)  and  neutral  selection  genes  (0.9 
＜NS/S＜1.1).  We  characterized  human  genes  targeted 
by  natural  selection.  Negatively  selected  human  genes 
were  markedly  associated  with  disease  occurrence,  but 
not  positively  selected  genes.  Interestingly,  positively  se-
lected  genes  displayed  an  increase  in  potentially  delete-
rious  nonsynonymous  SNPs  with  an  increased  fre-
quency  of  tryptophan  and  tyrosine  residues,  suggesting 
a  correlation  with  protective  effects  against  human 
disease.  Furthermore,  our  nonsynonymous/synonymous 
ratio  data  imply  that  specific  human  genes,  such  as 
ALMS1  and  SPTBN5  genes,  are  differentially  selected 
among  distinct  populations.  We  confirmed  that  in-
ferences  of  natural  selection  using  the  NS/S  ratio  can 
be  used  extensively  to  identify  functional  genes  selected 
during  the  evolutionary  adaptation  process.

Keywords:  single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP),  natu-
ral  selection,  disease  genes,  ethnicity

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  cookie_jklee@hotmail.com
Tel  +82-2-3010-4142,  Fax  +82-2-486-3312
Accepted  20  October  2008

Introduction

reduces 

The  human  genome  has  evolved  as  a  consequence  of 
historical  forces,  such  as  natural  selection.  The  present 
human  genome  contains  unique  signals  that  have  been 
copied  over  time,  either  via  positive  or  negative  selec-
tion.  Inferences  on  the  patterns  and  distribution  of  natu-
ral  selection  on  the  human  genome  may  thus  provide 
important  functional  information  (Nielsen,  2005).  For  ex-
ample,  highly  skewed  negative  or  positive  natural  se-
lection  indicates  that  a  particular  human  gene  has  been 
selected  by  the  actions  of  several  evolutionary  mecha-
nisms,  predominantly  due  to  disease  or  adaptation  to 
the  surrounding  environment.  Accordingly,  it  may  be 
possible  to  identify  putative  risk  factors  for  genetic  dis-
ease  by  determining  regions  of  the  human  genome  or 
genes  currently  under  selection  (Arbiza  et al.,  2006). 
Negative  selection 
the  number  of  non-
synonymous  (NS)  mutations,  whereas  positive  selection 
enhances  this  number,  relative  to  the  number  of  synon-
ymous  (S)  mutations  (Biswas  &  Akey,  2006).  In  previous 
studies,  the  NS/S  ratio  test  led  to  the  successful  identi-
fication  of  specific  positively  selected  genes,  including 
human  olfactory  genes  and  human  leukocyte  antigen 
(HLA)  loci  (Salamon  et al.,  1999;  Gilad  et al.,  2000). 
Therefore,  the  NS/S  ratio  test  is  a  recognized  tool  for 
the  effective  detection  of  types  of  natural  selection  in 
protein-coding  genes.  Under  conditions  of  no  selection, 
we  would  expect  a  NS/S  ratio  of  1.  In  case  of  negative 
selection,  NS/S  is  ＜1,  and  with  positive  selection,  NS/S 
would  be  ＞1  (Biswas  &  Akey,  2006).  Furthermore,  the 
availability  of  large  SNP  datasets  allowed  us  to  de-
termine  where  natural  selection  (either  negative  or  pos-
itive)  has  effected  variations  in  humans  (Nielsen  et al., 
2007).  In  this  study,  we  investigated  natural  selection  on 
the  human  genes  by  comparing  the  simple  ratios  of 
nonsynonymous  and  synonymous  coding  SNPs  (cSNPs) 
in  individual  protein-coding  genes. 

Methods

The  dataset

We  downloaded  and  analyzed  all  coding  SNPs  (cSNPs) 
with  a  validation  code  greater  than  2  from  the  public 
dbSNP  (build  125,  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/). 
Where  necessary,  we  additionally  used  genotype  data 
generated  from  the  International  HapMap  Project  with 

174    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  173-180,  December  2008

90  Yoruba  Nigerian  (YRI),  45  Japanese  (JPT),  45  Han 
Chinese  (HCB)  and  90  CEPH  (CEU)  individuals.  The 
number  of  disease  genes  located  on  each  chromosome 
was  determined  by  searching  the  OMIM  database 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/).  All  coding  SNP 
(cSNP)  data  were  used  to  perform  natural  selection 
mapping  of  human  protein-coding  genes  at  the  in-
dividual  gene  levels.

Statistical  analyses  of  SNP  data  for  determining 
natural  selection

To  investigate  the  natural  selection  process,  we  primar-
ily  employed 
the  nonsynonymous  vs  synonymous 
cSNPs  ratio.  In silico  prediction  of  the  functional  sig-
nificance  of  nonsynonymous  cSNPs  resulting  in  amino 
acid  alterations,  was  determined  using  PolyPhen 
(http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph/)  (Ramensky  et al., 
2002)  and/or  SIFT  (http://blocks.fhcrc.org/sift/SIFT.html) 
(Ng  &  Henikoff,  2003).  As  a  measure  of  population  dif-
ferentiation,  Wright’s FST  was  estimated  from  genotypic 
data.  Observed  heterozygosity  (Ho)  and  expected  heter-
ozygosity  (He)  were  additionally  obtained  from  HapMap 
database  for  the  selected  candidate  genes.  We  sub-
sequently  investigated  the  differences  (ΔH)  between  ex-
pected  heterozygosity  (He)  and  observed  heterozygosity 
(Ho)  to  establish  the  direction  of  natural  selection,  such 
as  heterozygote  advantages  or  disadvantages.  General 
statistical  analysis  was  performed  with  SAS  for  windows 
V8  (SAS  Institute  Inc.,  Cary,  NC,  USA),  and  statistical 
significance  was  inferred  at  a  two-tailed  values  of  p
＜0.05. 

Results

Gene-Based  Nonsynonymous/Synonymous  Ratio 
Test 

To  detect  human  genes  targeted  by  natural  selection, 
we  initially  collected  coding  SNP  (cSNP)  data,  including 
synonymous  and  nonsynonymous  SNPs,  of  all  human 
genes  from  the  public  dbSNP  (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/SNP/).  In  total,  15,913  genes  were  selected  due  to 
the  presence  of  at  least  one  coding  SNP.  From  the  se-
lected  genes,  24,019  nonsynonymous  and  24,641  syn-
onymous  SNPs  were  accumulated.  To  characterize  the 
natural  selection  process,  we  classified  and  plotted  all 
human  genes  on  the  basis  of  individual  nonsynonymous 
(NS)  and  synonymous  (S)  SNP  numbers.  Subsequently, 
we  selected  three  distinctive  groups  of  genes  represent-
ing  each  selection  type  (positive,  negative  and  neutral), 
as  shown  in  Fig.  1,  classified  based  on  the  non-
synonymous/synonymous  (NS/S)  ratio.  Among  human 
genes  with  at  least  10  synonymous  or  nonsynonymous 
SNPs  each,  we  singled  out  39  positively  selected  genes 
with  NS/S≥3,  37  negatively  selected  genes  with  NS/S
≤1/3,  and  12  neutral  selection  genes  with  0.9  ＜NS/S
＜1.1  for  comparison. 

Patterns of disease association by selection type

Following  selection  of  genes  from  the  three  typical 
groups  (Fig.  1),  we  analyzed  the  patterns  of  disease  as-
sociation  by  selection  type.  In  the  disease  association 
analysis,  we  eliminated  all  hypothetical  genes  and  pseu-

Fig.  1.  Plot  of  human  genes  from 
the  three  selection  types  (positive, 
neutral  and  negative)  based  on  in-
dividual  nonsynonymous/synonymous
(NS/S)  ratios.  All  human  genes 
(15,913)  containing  at  least  one 
coding  SNP  (cSNP)  were  plotted 
on  the  basis  of  the  number  of 
synonymous  (S)  and  nonsynony-
mous  (NS)  SNPs.  To  resolve  the 
characteristics  of  each  selection 
type,  extremely  skewed  selection 
groups  were  chosen  on  the  basis 
of  the  NS/S  ratio  (positive  se-
lection,  NS/S≥3;  negative  selec-
tion,  NS/S≤1/3;  neutral  selection, 
0.9＜NS/S＜1.1),  as  indicated  above
in  shadow. 

Natural  Selection  of  Human  Genes    175

Fig.  2.  Association  of  positively  or 
negatively  selected  genes  with  hu-
man  disease.  Genes  subjected  to 
extreme  positive  or  negative  se-
lection  were  identified  as  specified 
in  Fig.  1,  and  evaluated  for  known 
disease  association  by  searching 
the  OMIM  database.  Diseases 
linked  to  selected  genes  are  pre-
sented.  Notably,  negatively  select-
ed  genes  (0＜NS/S＜0.333)  were 
strongly  associated  with  human 
diseases,  but  not  positively  se-
lected  genes  (NS/S＞3). 

dogenes  from  each  selection  group.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2, 
negatively  selected  genes  were  strongly  associated  with 
disease.  Among  the  13  negatively  selected  genes,  8 
showed  disease  association,  specifically,  RYR1  with  ma-
lignant  hyperthermia  and  central  core  disease,  INSR 
with  diabetes  mellitus  and  Rabson-Mendenhall  syn-
drome,  KALRN  with  coronary  artery  disease,  EGFR  with 
lung  cancer,  MYH2  with  inclusion  body  myopathy  3, 
SEMA5A  with  idiopathic  autism,  SLC6A3  with  attention 
deficit  hyperactivity  disorder,  nicotine  dependence  and 
bipolar  disorder,  and  RAPTOR  with  psoriasis.  In  con-
trast,  no  positively  selected  genes  were  correlated  with 
human  disease,  except  HLA-DPB1  (linked  to  beryllium 
disease).  The  finding  that  negatively  selected  genes 
(reduced  rate  of  nonsynonymous  substitutions)  are 
strongly  correlated  with  involvement  in  human  disease  is 
consistent  with  previous  data  (Bustamante et al.,  2005). 

Increase  in  potentially  deleterious  nonsynony-
mous  cSNPs  by  positive  selection

Recently,  computational  methods  have  been  applied  to 
predict  the  deleterious  effects  of  nonsynonymous  SNPs 
in  humans  (Ramensky  et al.,  2002;  Ng  &  Henikoff, 
2003).  In  this  study,  we  used  the in silico  computational 
procedure  to  predict  the  functionality  of  nonsynonymous 
amino  acids  by  selection  type:  1)  positive,  2)  negative, 
and  3)  neutral,  using  PolyPhen  and  SIFT  programs.  We 
observed  the  lowest  number  of  deleterious  SNPs  in 
negatively  selected  genes,  a  low  number  in  neutrally  se-
lected  genes,  and  the  highest  SNP  incidence  in  pos-
itively  selected  genes.  PolyPhen  analysis  (Fig.  3A)  dis-
closed  that  the  proportion  of  damaging  amino  acids 
gradually  increased  from  negative  (19%)  to  neutral 
(26%)  and  positive  selection  (31%).  Similar  patterns 

Fig.  3.  Distribution  of  potentially  deleterious  nonsynony-
mous  cSNPs  by  selection  type  (positive,  negative  and  neu-
tral).  In  silico  prediction  of  nonsynonymous  SNPs  from 
genes  classified  in  different  selection  groups  (Fig.  1)  was 
performed  using  PolyPhen  (A)  and  SIFT  (B)  programs.  The 
damaging  group  includes  nonsense  mutations,  as  well  as 
all  types  of  damaging  results,  such  as  possibly  and  prob-
ably  damaging  (PolyPhen). 

were  observed  with  SIFT  analysis  (negative:  10%,  neu-
tral:  14%,  positive:  26%)  (Fig.  3B).  The  gradual  increase 
in  deleterious  SNPs  (from  negative  or  neutral  to  positive 

176    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  173-180,  December  2008

termination  codon 

Fig.  4.  Distribution  of  residues 
from  protein-coding  genes  of  all 
three  selection  types.  The  upper 
figure  represents  the  percentage 
of  each  amino  acid  by  selection 
type.  The 
is 
presented  as  ‘stop’.  The  lower  fig-
ure  depicts  the  proportion  of  ami-
no  acids  subjected  to  positive  and 
negative  selection  relative  to  neu-
tral  selection.  Amino  acids  that  are 
significantly  changed  are  indicated 
with  asterisks  (*).

selection)  suggests  significant  functional  changes  in 
positively  selected  genes.  Deleterious  SNPs  in  positively 
selected  genes  may  have  protective  effects  against  hu-
man  diseases.

Identification  of  significant  amino  acid  residues 
by  selection  type

Depending  on  selection  type,  we  observed  significant 
changes  in  the  functionality  of  amino  acids  altered  due 
to  nonsynonymous  SNPs.  Consequently,  we  attempted 
to  identify  the  types  of  amino  acids  that  are  frequently 
observed  in  specific  selection  types,  particularly  positive 
selection.  We  searched  all  amino  acid  variations  due  to 
nonsynonymous  SNPs  from  6  positively  selected  genes 
(NS/S≥5),  29  negatively  selected  genes  (NS/S≤1/3) 
and  12  neutrally  selected  genes  (0.9＜NS/S＜1.1).  For 
the  selection  on  amino  acid  type,  in  this  analysis,  we  in-
creased  the  NS/S  threshold  to  ≥5  (not  ≥3)  in  positive 
selection  in  order  to  use  similar  numbers  of  amino  acids 
from  each  selection  group.  Positively  and  negatively  se-
lected  genes  were  compared  to  those  that  underwent 
neutral  selection.  Since  critical  residues  in  negatively  se-
lected  genes  have  been  eliminated  in  the  population  by 
natural  selection,  we  mainly  focused  on  positively  se-
lected  genes.  As  shown  in  Fig.  4,  we  observed  an  in-
creased  frequency  of  tryptophan  and  tyrosine  residues 
in  positively  selected  protein-coding  genes.  Moreover, 
significantly  increased  frequency  of  termination  and  a 
marginal  increase  in  phenylalanine  were  evident  (Fig.  4). 
Our  results  support  the  theory  that  these  residues  gen-
erated  as  a  consequence  of  positive  selection  play  im-
portant  biological  roles.

Fig.  5.  Distribution  of  population  differentiation  (FST)  across 
ethnic  groups  by  selection  type.  The  standardized  variance 
(FST)  across  populations  was  calculated  for  each  SNP  se-
lected  from  three  different  selection  type  groups  using 
HapMap  genotype  data 
(CEU,  Caucasian;  HCB,  Han 
Chinese;  JPT,  Japanese;  YRI,  Yoruba  African).  Significant 
differences  (FST  values)  were  observed  for  9  SNPs  and  1 
SNP  of  positively  selected  genes,  ALMS1  and  SPTBN5,  re-
spectively,  between  Asian  and  African  populations.  Strong 
FST  values  of  the  ALMS1  and  SPTBN5  genes  are  marked. 
Black  bars  represent  the  median  values.

Population  differentiation  (FST)  by  selection  type

To  evaluate  the  population  divergence  of  the  three  natu-
ral  selection  types,  we  estimated  the FST  (fixation  index) 
among  different  ethnic  groups.  As  shown  in  Fig.  5,  no 
significant  differences  in FST  were  evident  between  neg-
ative  and  neutral  selection  groups  among  several  human 

populations.  However,  in  the  positive  selection  group,  a 
significant  distribution  difference  was  observed,  partic-
ularly  between  Asian  and  African  populations.  In  partic-
ular,  high FST  values  (range  of FST=0.64∼0.86)  were  ob-
tained  for  9  SNPs  (rs6724782,  rs3813227,  rs6546837, 
rs6546839, rs2056486, rs6546838, rs10193972, rs1052162 
and  rs6546836)  in  the  ALMS1  gene  in  Asian  and  African 
populations.  Ethnic  differences  in  the  ALMS1  gene  were 
additionally  observed  between  Caucasian  and  Africans, 
with  lower  FST  values  (range  of  FST=0.40∼0.58).  Extre-
me  differences  in  allele  frequencies  of  ALMS1  among 
populations  have  been  reported  previously  (The  Interna-
tional  HapMap  Consortium,  2005).  Since  ALMS1  is  a 
causative  gene  for  Alstrom  syndrome  1  resulting  in  obe-
sity,  type  2  diabetes  and  neurosensory  degeneration 
(Collin  et al.,  2002),  the  variable  incidence  of  this  syn-
drome  among  ethnic  groups  is  attributed  to  the  natural 
selection  process.  The  ALMS1  gene  displayed  high FST 
values  between  Africans  and  Asians  as  well  as  between 
Africans  and  Caucasians.  In  addition,  a  SNP  (rs1456235) 
in  SPTBN5  showed  a  very  high FST  value  (FST=0.80)  be-
tween  Africans  and  Asians,  but  low  FST  between  other 
ethnic  groups  (range  of FST=0.21∼0.29).  These  data  in-
dicate  that  SPTBN5  is  an  important  Asian  gene  in  the 
positive  selection  group.  Significant  population  variations 
of  positively  selected  genes  (ALMS1  and  SPTBN5)  imply 
differential  positive  selection  pressure  in  distinct  ethnic 
populations. 

Natural  Selection  of  Human  Genes    177

Distribution  of  heterozygosity  by  selection  type 
among  ethnic  groups

Observed  heterozygosity  (Ho)  and  expected  hetero-
zygosity  (He)  of  genes  were  plotted  from  all  three  se-
lection  groups  (data  not  shown).  In  Africans,  median 
heterozygosity  (both  observed  and  expected)  was  sim-
ilar  (ranging  from  0.188  to  0.203)  for  different  types  of 
selection.  However,  the  distribution  of  median  hetero-
zygosity  was  different  in  Caucasian  and  Asian  popula-
tions.  Median  heterozygosity  of  neutral  selection  genes 
in  these  populations  was  as  high  as  that  in  Africans, 
ranging  from  0.20  to  0.244.  However,  median  hetero-
zygosity  in  the  positive  selection  group  was  very  low  in 
both  populations  (0.045∼0.133).  Our  data  suggest  that 
the  positive  selection  process  occurs  over  a  short  evolu-
tionary  period  in  Caucasian  and  Asian  populations.  In 
addition,  we  calculated  the  differences  between  ob-
served  and  expected  heterozygosity  (Ho  -  He)  to  identify 
the  direction  of  selection  and  genes  undergoing  ethnic 
group-specific  selection.  A  high  positive  value  signifies  a 
heterozygote  advantage,  whereas  a  high  negative  value 
is  suggestive  of  heterozygote  disadvantage  or  genomic 
deletions.  In  neutral  selection  genes,  SNPs  were  ran-
domly  distributed  between  negative  and  positive  values, 
as  expected  (Fig.  6).  However,  olfactory  receptor  genes 
(OR6K6  &  OR10C1  genes)  in  the  positively  selected 
group  were  differentially  selected  in  distinct  populations. 
For  example,  the  OR6K6  gene  has  a  heterozygote  ad-
vantage  in  Africans,  whereas  OR10C1  has  a  hetero-
zygote  disadvantage  in  the  Asian  population.  On  the 

Fig.  6.  Identification  of  genes  un-
dergoing  ethnic  group-specific  se-
lection.  Genes  subjected  to  eth-
nic-specific  selection  were  identi-
fied  by  subtracting  the  expected 
from  observed  heterozygosity  (Ho 
-  He).  Heterozygosity  was  calcu-
lated  using  HapMap  SNP  geno-
type  data  (CEU,  CEPH  individuals; 
HCB,  Han  Chinese;  JPT,  Japa-
nese;  YRI,  Yoruba  African).  The 
DMD  gene  was  used  as  a  control 
showing  strong  negative  values  in 
all  ethnic  groups  due  to  its  loca-
tion  on  the  X  chromosome.

178    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  173-180,  December  2008

other  hand,  among  negatively  selected  genes,  LAMC1 
displayed  a  significant  decrease  in  observed  hetero-
zygosity  in  Asians  (especially  Japanese),  suggesting  a 
heterozygosity  disadvantage  of 
the 
Japanese  population.  In  contrast,  observed  hetero-
zygosity  was  markedly  increased  for  NF1  and  EGFR 
genes  in  Asians  (Fig.  6).  The  difference  between  ob-
served  and  expected  heterozygosity  reveals  that  pos-
itively  or  negatively  selected  genes  undergo  different  di-
rections  of  selection  pressure,  such  as  heterozygote  ad-
vantage  or  disadvantage,  in  distinct  populations. 

this  gene 

in 

Discussion

functional 

The  occurrence  of  genetic  variations  in  non-functional 
regions  is  inconsequential,  whereas  mutations  in  the 
functionally  critical  regions  of  genes  affect  the  fitness  of 
organisms,  leading  to  natural  selection  (Bamshad  & 
Wooding,  2003;  Nielsen,  2005).  In  this  study,  we  identi-
fied  several  human  genes  that  display  signatures  of  nat-
ural  selection  detected  using  the  NS/S  ratio.  The  abun-
dant  SNP  data  obtained  from  the  international  HapMap 
project  (The  International  HapMap  Consortium,  2003; 
2005;  2007),  particularly  in  coding  regions  of  human 
genes,  renders  the  NS/S  ratio  test  very  powerful  for  in-
vestigating  the  natural  selection  of  the  human  genome 
and  genes.  In  addition,  there  is  increased  awareness 
that  regions  of  the  human  genome  targeted  by  natural 
selection  are  generally  of 
importance. 
Disease-  causing  mutations  should  affect  organism 
fitness.  Therefore,  there  is  an  intimate  relationship  be-
tween  disease  and  selection  that  can  potentially  be  ex-
ploited  to  identify  candidate  disease  loci  and  SNPs.  In 
this  study,  we  observed  a  strong  correlation  of  neg-
atively  selected  genes  (high  NS/S  ratio)  with  human  dis-
ease,  such  as  RYR1  with  malignant  hyperthermia,  INSR 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  and  EGFR  with  lung  cancer. 
Strong  correlation  of  negative  selection  with  disease 
genes  has  been  demonstrated 
in  earlier  studies 
(Bustamante et al.,  2005;  Biswas  &  Akey,  2006),  indicat-
ing  that  negative  selection  constitutes  a  major  evolu-
tionary  pressure  against  human  diseases.  These  findings 
are  consistent  with  a  previous  report  showing  that 
strong  selective  pressure  with  NS/S＜0.1  is  significantly 
associated  with  human  disease  (Arbiza  et al.,  2006). 
However,  positively  selected  genes  were  not  linked  to 
human  disease,  except  HLA-DPB1,  which  is  associated 
with  chronic  beryllium  disease  (Richeldi  et al.,  1993).  It 
is  established  that  HLA  regions  have  undergone  positive 
selection  (Salamon  et al.,  1999).  As  evident  with  HLA 
genes,  low  correlation  of  positively  selected  genes  with 
disease  is  probably  a  result  of  their  protective  effects 
against  human  diseases,  which  may  be  involved  pre-

dominantly  in  the  longevity  of  human  life.  Positive  se-
lection  may  lead  to  the  generation  of  a  diverse  spec-
trum  of  amino  acids  in  protein-coding  genes,  which,  in 
turn,  ensure  more  flexibility  in  responses  to  detrimental 
environments.  However,  the  detailed  biological  evolu-
tionary  functions  of  positively  selected  genes  remain  to 
be  clarified. 
    To  identify  the  important  amino  acids  that  have  un-
dergone  adaptation  by  natural  selection  in  the  human 
population,  we  mainly  focused  on  positive  selection 
genes,  since  the  critical  SNPs  and  residues  of  negative 
selection  genes  have  been  already  eliminated  from  the 
human  population.  Only  non-functional  SNPs  or  residues 
should  be  abundant  in  negatively  selected  genes.  This 
concept  was  confirmed  by  in silico  prediction  of  non-
synonymous  SNPs  using  PolyPhen  in  that  the  frequency 
of  deleterious  or  damaging  nonsynonymous  SNPs  was 
low  in  negatively  selected  genes  (19%),  intermediate  in 
neutral  selection  genes  (26%)  and  high  in  positively  se-
lected  genes  (31%).  The  high  frequency  of  deleterious 
nonsynonymous  SNPs  in  positively  selected  genes  is  in-
dicative  of  significant  changes  in  the  functions  of  corre-
sponding  proteins.  Furthermore,  the  high  incidence  of 
tryptophan,  tyrosine,  phenylalanine  and  termination  co-
dons  in  positively  selected  genes  signifies  critical  roles 
of  these  residues.  Additionally,  tryptophan,  cysteine,  ar-
ginine  and  glycine  are  possibly  associated  with  genetic 
diseases  (Vitkup et al.,  2003).  Therefore,  tryptophan  ap-
pears  important  for  both  positive  and  negative  selection, 
whereas  tyrosine,  phenylalanine  and  termination  codons 
are  preferentially  associated  with  positively  selected 
genes. 
    Natural  selection  can  occur  in  specific  populations 
(Sabeti et al.,  2006).  Several  genes  have  been  selected 
in  different  ethnic  populations,  specifically  the  Duffy  an-
tigen  (FY)  gene  for  protection  against  malaria  infection  in 
Africa  and  lactase  gene  (LCT)  for  lactose  intolerance  in 
Europe  (Hamblin  &  Di  Rienzo,  2000;  Bersaglieri  et al., 
2004).  Population  differences  were  mainly  observed  for 
positively  selected  human  genes,  indicating  variations  in 
positive  selection,  depending  on  the  population.  In  par-
ticular,  it  has  been  reported  that  the  ALMS1  gene  has 
been  positively  selected  in  human  populations  (The 
International  HapMap  Consortium,  2005).  Furthermore, 
French  Acadians  and  other  ethnically  or  geographically 
isolated  populations  display  a  higher  frequency  of 
Alstrom  syndrome  (Marshall  et al.,  1997;  Deeble  et al., 
2000).  The  SPTBN5  gene  additionally  displayed  a  signal 
of  population-specific  selection.  However,  the  biological 
functions  of  this  gene  remain  to  be  characterized.  In  ad-
dition,  there  are  a  number  of  limitations  in  distinguishing 
the  effects  of  population-specific  selection  and  migration 
of  the  human  population,  leading  to  high  population  dif-

ferentiation  (FST)  of  SNPs  among  ethnic  groups. 
    On  the  other  hand,  the  heterozygosity  test  is  a  useful 
tool  to  differentiate  gene  selection  in  diverse  populations 
(Halliburton,  2004).  We  detected  low  median  hetero-
zygosity  of  positively  selected  genes  in  Asian  and 
Caucasian  populations,  suggesting  that  these  pop-
ulations  have  a  short  evolutionary  time  for  positive  gene 
selection,  compared  to  Africans.  Another  contributory 
factor  to  this  difference  is  migration  of  populations.  In 
addition,  differences  in  observed  and  expected  hetero-
zygosity  indicate  that  the  heterozygosity  test  is  a  very 
useful  method  to  identify  genes  with  heterozygote  ad-
vantages  and/or  balancing  selection  in  different  popula-
tions.  The  OR6K6  gene  displayed  a  strong  heterozygote 
advantage  in  the  African  population  only,  whereas  NF1 
and  EGFR  genes  displayed  heterozygote  advantages  in 
the  Asian  population.  Higher  somatic  mutations  in  the 
EGFR  gene  were  evident  in  Asians  (10%  European  ver-
sus  30%  Japanese  lung  cancer  patients)  (Johnson  & 
Janne,  2005),  and  mutations  were  directly  correlated  to 
the  clinical  response  to  the  anti-cancer  drug  (Gefitinib; 
EGFR  inhibitor).  The  high  incidence  of  EGFR  mutations 
in  cancer  may  explain  the  heterozygote  advantage  of 
this  gene  in  Asians.  Application  of  the  NS/S  ratio  test 
previously  showed  that  human  olfactory  receptor  genes 
as  well  as  human  leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  loci  (Salamon 
et al.,  1999)  have  undergone  positive  selection  (Gilad et 
al.,  2000).  Interestingly,  olfactory  receptor  (OR6K6  & 
OR10C1)  genes  were  differentially  selected  in  distinct 
populations.  Specifically,  the  OR6K6  gene  had  a  hetero-
zygote  advantage  in  Africans,  whereas  OR10C1  ex-
hibited  heterozygote  disadvantages  or  genomic  alter-
ations,  such  as  copy  number  variations,  in  the  Asian 
population,  although  we  do  not  fully  understand  the 
reasons.  Ethnic-specific  heterozygote  advantages  of 
positively  or  negatively  selected  genes  signify  different 
types  of  natural  selection  in  distinct  populations. 
    In  summary,  in  spite  of  some  limitations  such  as  bias-
es  in  distribution  and  density  of  SNPs  as  well  as  the  as-
certainment  bias,  we  demonstrated  that  natural  selection 
analysis  of  human  genes  using  the  NS/S  ratio  test  is  an 
efficient  method  to  elucidate  the  evolutionary  history  of 
individual  human  genes.  We  additionally  confirmed  that 
inferences  of  natural  selection  can  be  used  extensively 
to  identify  functional  genes  selected  during  the  evolu-
tionary  adaptation  process.  Enhanced  knowledge  of  nat-
ural  selection  in  human  genes  will  provide  novel  oppor-
tunities  for  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  human  genes 
and  genome. 

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  a  grant  from  the  Ministry 

Natural  Selection  of  Human  Genes    179

of  Health  &  Welfare,  Republic  of  Korea  (01-PJ10-PG6- 
01GN15-001)  and  a  grant  from  the  Research  Project  on 
the  Production  of  Bio-organs  (No.  200606021001  &  No. 
20070401034029),  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Forestry, 
Republic  of  Korea.  YJ  Kim  was  partially  supported  by  a 
grant  from  the  Cerebrovascular  Disease  Oriental  Medi-
cine  Project  of  MOST  (Ministry  of  Science  &  Technolo-
gy). 

References

Arbiza,  L.,  Duchi,  S.,  Montaner,  D.,  Burguest,  J.,  Pantoja- 
Uceda,  D.,  Pineda-Lucena,  A.,  Dopazo,  J.,  and  Dopazo, 
H.  (2006).  Selective  pressures  at  a  codon-level  predict 
deleterious  mutations  in  human  disease  genes.  J. Mol. 
Biol.  358,  1390-1404.

Bamshad,  M.,  and  Wooding,  S.P.  (2003).  Signatures  of  nat-
ural  selection  in  the  human  genome. Nat. Rev. Genet.  4, 
99-111.

Bersaglieri,  T.,  Sabeti,  P.C.,  Patterson,  N.,  Vanderploeg,  T., 
Schaffner,  S.F.,  Drake,  J.A.,  Rhodes,  M.,  Reich,  D.E.,  and 
Hirschhorn,  J.N.  (2004).  Genetic  signatures  of  strong  re-
cent  positive  selection  at  the  lactase  gene. Am. J. Hum. 
Genet.  74,  1111-1120.

Biswas,  S.,  and  Akey,  J.M.  (2006).  Genomic  insights  into 

positive  selection.  Trends Genet.  22,  437-446.

Bustamante,  C.D.,  Fledel-Alon,  A.,  Williamson,  S.,  Nielsen, 
R.,  Hubisz,  M.T.,  Glanowski,  S.,  Tanenbaum,  D.M., 
White,  T.J.,  Sninsky,  J.J.,  Hernandez,  R.D.,  Civello,  D., 
Adams,  M.D.,  Cargill,  M.,  and  Clark,  A.G.  (2005).  Natural 
selection  on  protein-coding  genes  in  the  human  genome. 
Nature  437,  1153-1157.

Collin,  G.B.,  Marshall,  J.D.,  Ikeda,  A.,  So,  W.V.,  Russell- 
Eggitt,  I.,  Maffei,  P.,  Beck,  S.,  Boerkoel,  C.F.,  Sicolo,  N., 
Martin,  M.,  Nishina,  P.M.,  and  Naggert,  J.K.  (2002). 
Mutations  in  ALMS1  cause  obesity,  type  2  diabetes  and 
neurosensory  degeneration  in  Alstrom  syndrome.  Nat. 
Genet.  31,  74-78.

Deeble,  V.J.,  Roberts,  E.,  Jackson,  A.,  Lench,  N.,  Karbani, 
G.,  and  Woods,  C.G.  (2000).  The  continuing  failure  to 
recognise  Alstrom  syndrome  and  further  evidence  of  ge-
netic  homogeneity.  J. Med. Genet.  37,  219.

Gilad,  Y.,  Segre,  D.,  Skorecki,  K.,  Nachman,  M.W.,  Lancet, 
D.,  and  Sharon,  D.  (2000).  Dichotomy  of  single-nucleotide 
polymorphism  haplotypes  in  olfactory  receptor  genes  and 
pseudogenes.  Nat. Genet.  26,  221-224.

Halliburton,  R.  (2004).  Introduction to Population  (NJ,  USA: 

Pearson  Education  Inc.). 

Hamblin,  M.T.,  and  Di  Rienzo,  A.  (2000).  Detection  of  the 
signature  of  natural  selection  in  humans:  evidence  from 
the  Duffy  blood  group  locus.  Am. J. Hum. Genet.  66, 
1669-1679.

Johnson,  B.E.,  and  Janne,  P.A.  (2005).  Epidermal  growth 
factor  receptor  mutations  in  patients  with  non-small  cell 
lung  cancer.  Cancer Res.  65,  7525-7529.

Marshall,  J.D.,  Ludman,  M.D.,  Shea,  S.E.,  Salisbury,  S.R., 
Willi,  S.M.,  LaRoche,  R.G.,  and  Nishina,  P.M.  (1997). 
Genealogy,  natural  history,  and  phenotype  of  Alstrom 

180    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  173-180,  December  2008

syndrome  in  a  large  Acadian  kindred  and  three  additional 
families.  Am. J. Med. Genet.  73,  150-161.

Ng,  P.C.,  and  Henikoff,  S.  (2003).  SIFT:  predicting  amino 
acid  changes  that  affect  protein  function.  Nucleic Acids 
Res.  31,  3812-3814.

Nielsen,  R.  (2005).  Molecular  signatures  of  natural  selection. 

Annu. Rev. Genet.  39,  197-218.

Nielsen,  R.,  Hellmann,  I.,  Hubisz,  M.,  Bustamante,  C.,  and 
Clark,  A.G.  (2007).  Recent  and  ongoing  selection  in  the 
human  genome.  Nat. Rev. Genet.  8,  857-868.

Ramensky,  V.,  Bork,  P.,  and  Sunyaev,  S.  (2002).  Human 
non-synonymous  SNPs:  server  and  survey. Nucleic Acids 
Res.  30,  3894-3900.

Richeldi,  L.,  Sorrentino,  R.,  and  Saltini,  C.  (1993).  HLA-DPB1 
glutamate  69:  a  genetic  marker  of  beryllium  disease. 
Science  262,  242-244.

Sabeti,  P.C.,  Schaffner,  S.F.,  Fry,  B.,  Lohmueller,  J.,  Varilly, 
P.,  Shamovsky,  O.,  Palma,  A.,  Mikkelsen,  T.S.,  Altshuler, 

D.,  and  Lander,  E.S.  (2006).  Positive  natural  selection  in 
the  human  lineage.  Science  312,  1614-1620.

Salamon,  H.,  Klitz,  W.,  Easteal,  S.,  Gao,  X.,  Erlich,  H.A., 

Fernandez-Viña,  M.,  Trachtenberg,  E.A.,  McWeeney,  S.K., 

Nelson,  M.P.,  and  Thomson,  G.  (1999).  Evolution  of  HLA 
class  II  molecules:  allelic  and  amino  acid  site  variability 
across  populations.  Genetics  152,  393-400.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2003).  The  Interna-

tional  HapMap  Project.  Nature  426,  789-796.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2005).  A  haplotype 

map  of  the  human  genome.  Nature  437,  1299-1320.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2007).  A  second 
generation  human  haplotype  map  of  over  3.1  million 
SNPs.  Nature  449,  851-861.

Vitkup,  D.,  Sander,  C.,  and  Church,  G.M.  (2003).  The  ami-
no-acid  mutational  spectrum  of  human  genetic  disease. 
Genome Biology  4,  R72.

