A R T IC L E

Genomics  &  Informatics
Vol.  10(1)  33-39,  March  2012

http://dx.doi.org/10.5808/GI.2012.10.1.33
pISSN 1598-866X eISSN 2234-0742

CaGe:  A  Web-Based  Cancer  Gene  Annotation  System  for 
Cancer  Genomics

Young-Kyu  Park1,2,  Tae-Wook  Kang1,  Su-Jin 
Baek1,3,  Kwon-Il  Kim2,  Seon-Young  Kim1,3, 
Doheon  Lee2*  and  Yong  Sung  Kim1,3**

1Medical  Genomics  Research  Center,  KRIBB,  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea,  2Department  of  Bio  and  Brain  Engi-
neering,  KAIST,  Daejeon  305-701,  Korea,  3Department 
of  Functional  Genomics,  University  of  Science  and 
Technology,  Daejeon  305-806,  Korea

formance  in  annotating  somatic  mutations  from  a  pub-
lished  small  cell  lung  cancer  study. 

Keywords:  annotation,  cancer  gene,  high-throughput  ge-
nomic  technology,  mutation,  next-generation  sequenc-
ing,  pathway

Availability:  CaGe  is  freely  available  at  http://mgrc.kribb. 
re.kr/cage.

Abstract

Introduction

High-throughput  genomic  technologies  (HGTs),  including 
next-generation  DNA  sequencing  (NGS),  microarray,  and 
serial  analysis  of  gene  expression  (SAGE),  have  become 
effective  experimental  tools  for  cancer  genomics  to 
identify  cancer-associated  somatic  genomic  alterations 
and  genes.  The  main  hurdle  in  cancer  genomics  is  to 
identify  the  real  causative  mutations  or  genes  out  of 
many  candidates  from  an  HGT-based  cancer  genomic 
analysis.  One  useful  approach  is  to  refer  to  known  can-
cer  genes  and  associated  information.  The  list  of  known 
cancer  genes  can  be  used  to  determine  candidates  of 
cancer  driver  mutations,  while  cancer  gene-related  in-
formation,  including  gene  expression,  protein-protein  in-
teraction,  and  pathways,  can  be  useful  for  scoring  novel 
candidates.  Some  cancer  gene  or  mutation  databases 
exist  for  this  purpose,  but  few  specialized  tools  exist  for 
an  automated  analysis  of  a  long  gene  list  from  an 
HGT-based  cancer  genomic  analysis.  This  report  pres-
ents  a  new  web-accessible  bioinformatic  tool,  called 
CaGe,  a  cancer  genome  annotation  system  for  the  as-
sessment  of  candidates  of  cancer  genes  from  HGT- 
based  cancer  genomics.  The  tool  provides  users  with 
information  on  cancer-related  genes,  mutations,  path-
ways,  and  associated  annotations  through  annotation 
and  browsing  functions.  With  this  tool,  researchers  can 
classify  their  candidate  genes  from  cancer  genome 
studies  into  either  previously  reported  or  novel  catego-
ries  of  cancer  genes  and  gain  insight  into  underlying 
carcinogenic  mechanisms  through  a  pathway  analysis. 
We  show  the  usefulness  of  CaGe  by  assessing  its  per-

*Corresponding  author1:  E-mail:  dhlee@biosoft.kaist.ac.kr
Tel  +82-42-350-4316,  Fax  +82-42-350-8680
**Corresponding  author2:  E-mail:  yongsung@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8110,  Fax  +82-42-879-8119
Received  26  January  2012,  Revised  10  February  2012, 
Accepted  16  February  2012

High-throughput  genomic  technologies  (HGTs),  including 
next-generation  DNA  sequencing  (NGS),  microarray,  and 
serial  analysis  of  gene  expression  (SAGE),  have  become 
effective  tools  for  cancer  genomics  through  various 
applications.  Especially,  the  applications  of  NGS  include 
whole-genome,  exome,  and  transcriptome  approaches 
for  searching  for  a  wide  range  of  cancer-specific  geno-
mic  alterations,  such  as  point  mutations,  insertions,  and 
deletions;  copy  number  changes;  and  rearrangements, 
leading  to  the  development  of  cancer  [1]. 
    One  of  the  hurdles  in  HGT-based  cancer  genomics  is 
to  identify  causative  mutations  or  genes  out  of  many 
candidates  from  the  analysis.  A  useful  approach  is  to 
refer  to  known  cancer  genes  and  associated  information 
[2].  The  list  of  known  cancer  genes  can  be  used  to  de-
termine  candidates  of  cancer  driver  mutations,  while 
cancer  gene-related  information,  such  as  gene  expres-
sion,  protein-protein  interaction,  and  pathway  informa-
tion,  can  be  useful  for  scoring  novel  candidates. 
    Some  useful  cancer  genomic  databases  for  this  pur-
pose  exist,  including  Cancer  Gene  Census  (CGC)  [3] 
and  Catalogue  of  Somatic  Mutations  in  Cancer  (COSMIC) 
[4],  which  have  been  constructed  and  managed  by  the 
Cancer  Genome  Project  of  the  Welcome  Trust  Sanger 
Institute;  and  Cancer  Gene  Index  (CGI,  http://ncicb.nci. 
nih.gov/NCICB/projects/cgdcp),  The  Cancer  Genome  Atlas 
(TCGA,  http://cancergenome.nih.gov),  and  Cancer  Ge-
nome  Anatomy  Project  (CGAP,  http://cgap.nci.nih.gov), 
which  are  maintained  by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  of 
the  U.  S.  National  Institute  of  Health  and  National  Hu-
man  Genome  Research  Institute.  Among  them,  COSMIC 
and  CGC  are  the  two  most  commonly  used  resources 
among  researchers  when  checking  reported  cancer  driv-
er  mutations.  The  COSMIC  database  stores  information 
on  somatic  mutations  and  associated  information  ex-
tracted  from  the  scientific  literature,  while  the  CGC  da-

34 Genomics  &  Informatics Vol.  10(1)  33-39,  March  2012

tabase  is  a  catalog  of  cancer  genes  with  manually 
screened  somatic  mutations  extracted  from  the  lite-
rature.  These  cancer  genes  are  annotated  with  infor-
mation  concerning  chromosomal  location,  tumor  types 
in  which  mutations  are  found,  classes  of  mutations  that 
contribute  to  oncogenesis,  and  other  genetic  properties. 
Also,  CGI  is  known  to  be  created  through  an  automated 
linguistic  text  analysis  of  millions  of  MEDLINE  abstracts, 
with  manual  validation  and  annotation  of  the  extracted 
data  by  expert  curators.  It  is  a  high-quality  data  re-
source  consisting  of  genes  that  have  been  experi-
mentally  associated  with  human  cancer  diseases  and/or 
pharmacological  compounds,  the  evidence  of  these  as-
sociations,  and  relevant  annotations  on  the  data.  Thus, 
it  can  also  be  a  valuable  resource  to  annotate  mutation 
data  from  cancer  genomics  studies.
    Currently,  few  specialized  tools  exist  for  an  automated 
analysis  of  a  long  gene  list  from  HGT-based  cancer 
genomics.  While  previously  described  cancer  genomic 
information  databases  can  be  useful,  they  are  not  effec-
tive  in  processing  results  from  NGS-based  cancer  ge-
nomic  studies.  Meanwhile,  there  are  many  functional  an-
notation  systems  to  analyze  gene  lists  derived  from 
high-throughput  microarray  experiments,  including  DAVID 
[5],  GoMiner  [6],  GOstat  [7],  Onto-express  [8],  and  gene 
set  enrichment  analysis  (GSEA)  [9].  DAVID  is  one  of  the 
most  popular  general  purpose  functional  annotation 

systems.  It  provides  various  effective  analysis  tools  and 
is  also  applicable  in  the  analysis  of  gene  lists  from  can-
cer  genomics  research.  However,  DAVID  is  not  opti-
mized  for  processing  results  from  HGT-based  cancer 
genomics  data,  especially  for  NGS-based  cancer  ge-
nomics  downstream  data;  therefore,  a  more  specialized 
cancer  gene  annotation  system  is  needed.
    Here,  we  introduce  a  web-accessible  cancer  genome 
annotation  system,  named  CaGe,  to  provide  users  with 
information  on  cancer  genes,  mutations,  pathways,  and 
associated  annotations,  based  on  several  cancer  gene 
databases  composed  of  reported  cancer-causing  genes 
and  associated  cancer  pathways.  For  a  given  gene  list, 
CaGe  searches  cancer  gene  databases  with  converted 
standard  gene  symbols,  analyzes  the  biological  path-
ways,  and  provides  various  cancer  gene-related  annota-
tions  through  intuitive  web  user  interfaces.  It  also  serves 
additional  functions,  including  processing  various  input 
types  and  formats,  managing  jobs  for  user  submitted 
tasks,  and  browsing  for  cancer  genes  and  pathways 
with  various  useful  hyperlinks  between  the  annotations 
and  the  external  public  annotation  databases.  We  hope 
CaGe  will  be  useful  in  identifying  cancer-causing  muta-
tions  and  genes  in  HGT-based  cancer  genomics.

Fig.  1.  Construction  and 
main  service 
flows  of 
CaGe.  SIFT,  Sorting  Into-
lerant  From  Tolerant;  NGS, 
next-generation  DNA  se-
quencing;  HGNC,  HUGO 
Gene  Nomenclature  Com-
mittee;  CGC,  Cancer  Gene 
Census;  CGI,  Cancer  Gene 
Index. 

Cancer  Gene  Annotator 35

Methods

The  goal  of  this  study  was  to  provide  researchers  with 
a  tool  for  classifying  their  candidate  genes  from  HGT- 
based  cancer  genome  studies  into  previously  reported 
or  novel  categories  of  cancer  genes,  while  providing  in-
sight  into  underlying  carcinogenic  mechanisms  through 
a  pathway  analysis.  To  implement  the  cancer  gene  an-
notation  function  of  CaGe,  we  constructed  reported 
cancer  gene  and  cancer  annotation  databases  from 
public  cancer  genomic  databases  and  cancer  pathway- 
gene  databases  by  pathway  analysis  with  reported  can-
cer  gene  sets  and  canonical  pathways.  We  also  con-
structed  a  gene  ID  database  to  allow  various  input  for-
mats  for  the  input  of  gene  lists  and  a  gene  functional 
annotation  database  to  provide  users  with  functional 
clues  for  the  annotated  candidate  genes.  Then,  we  de-
veloped  a  core  retrieval  program  and  web  interfaces  for 
the  main  functions,  which  include  cancer  gene  annota-
tion,  cancer  pathway  annotation,  cancer  gene  browsing, 
and  cancer  pathway  browsing.  The  workflow  for  the  da-
tabase  construction  and  data  processing  in  CaGe  is 
summarized  in  Fig.  1,  and  the  cancer  gene  annotation 
page  of  the  CaGe  web  interface  is  shown  in  Fig.  2.

Cancer  gene  and  annotation  data

To  construct  the  reported  cancer  gene  database,  we 
used  gene  sets  from  the  CGC  database  (released  on 
Dec,  2010)  and  CGI  database  (downloaded  on  Feb, 
2011).  The  cancer  pathways  for  the  cancer  pathway 
gene  database  construction  were  assigned  based  on 
statistical  significance  from  one-tailed  Fisher’s  exact  test 
for  overlapping  genes  between  reported  cancer  gene 
sets  and  canonical  pathways  from  public  pathway  data-
bases,  including  KEGG  (Release  57.0),  BioCarta,  and 
Reactome  (downloaded  on  Feb,  2011). 
    We  also  created  a  gene  ID  database  to  convert  vari-
ous  input  identifiers  into  standard  gene  symbols  with 
HUGO  Gene  Nomenclature  Committee  (HGNC)  (down-
loaded  on  Feb,  2011)  data  for  the  standard  gene  sym-
bols  and  with  Entrez  Gene  (downloaded  on  Feb,  2011) 
and  UniProt  (Release  2011_03)  data  for  the  gene  IDs, 
protein  IDs,  and  functional  annotations.

Input  types

Available  input  types  include  a  list  of  gene  symbols, 
Entrez  gene  IDs,  or  UniProt  accessions  and  output  files 

Fig.  2.  Cancer  gene  annota-
tion  page  of  CaGe  web  inter-
face. 

36 Genomics  &  Informatics Vol.  10(1)  33-39,  March  2012

from  prediction  tools,  such  as  Sorting  Intolerant  From 
Tolerant  (SIFT)  [10]  and  PolyPhen  [11],  which  evaluate 
functional  effects  of  mutations  on  proteins.  CaGe  parses 
the  output  of  those  tools  to  extract  the  list  of  genes  that 
have  somatic  mutations  evaluated  as  functionally  dam-
aging,  classify  them  into  previously  reported  and  novel 
candidate  cancer  genes,  and  conduct  pathway  analyses 
to  give  insights  into  underlying  carcinogenic  mecha-
nisms.  Thus,  CaGe  offers  straightforward  data  process-

ing  from  HGT-based  data  without  additional  data  con-
version. 

Cancer  gene  and  pathway  annotation  workflow

After  acquiring  user  input,  CaGe  converts  various  input 
gene  IDs  into  standard  gene  symbols,  finds  known  can-
cer  genes  and  pathways,  links  various  cancer-related 
annotations  to  matched  genes,  and  outputs  them  in  the 

Fig.  3.  Cancer  gene  annotation 
results  page  of  CaGe  web  inter-
face.

Cancer  Gene  Annotator 37

form  of  tables  or  text  files  through  the  web  interface 
(Fig.  3).  Another  function  of  CaGe  is  to  identify  over-rep-
resented  cancer-related  or  other  biological  pathways 
from  the  input  gene  list  by  performing  one-tailed  Fisher’s 
exact  test. 
    When  processing  more  than  one  annotation  job,  users 
can  manage  their  annotation  tasks  through  the  CaGe  in-
terface,  and  access  to  their  results  is  maintained  by  the 
internal  job  database  of  CaGe  until  the  jobs  are  deleted 
by  the  user  or  by  a  scheduled  cleaning  process.  The  IP 
addresses  of  client  computers  are  used  for  secured  job 
management  without  a  logon  process.  Completed  anno-
tation  jobs  are  listed  on  the  job  table,  and  the  annotated 
results  can  be  shown  selectively  by  the  user  on  the  an-
notation  result  page  or  can  be  downloaded  as  tab-de-
limited  text  files  for  further  analyses.  The  annotation  on 

the  results  page  has  many  useful  links  to  gene  and  can-
cer-related  information  in  the  CaGe  database  or  external 
public  databases.  In  addition  to  the  cancer  gene  and 
pathway  annotation  function,  CaGe  provides  a  function 
to  browse  cancer  genes  and  pathways  so  that  users 
can  search  cancer-related  annotations  without  an  input 
list.  The  search  flows  of  cancer  genes  and  pathways  are 
connected  to  each  other  by  crosslinks  in  the  cancer 
gene  information  page  or  pathway  information  page. 

Results  and  Discussion 

Database  and  web  interface

Based  on  the  reported  cancer-related  gene  sets  from 
CGC  and  CGI,  a  cancer  gene  database  and  a  cancer 

Table  1.  Cancer  gene  sets  and  cancer  pathway  gene  sets  in  the  CaGe  database

No.

Cancer  and  pathway  gene  set

Gene  set  code

No.  of  genes

1
2
3
4

Cancer  Gene  Census
Cancer  Gene  Index
CGC-based  Pathway  Genes
CGI-based  Pathway  Genes

CGC
CGI

CGC_PATH
CGI_PATH

  436
7,181
5,790
6,744

No.  of  significant 

pathwaysa

n/a
n/a
143
176

n/a,  not  available. 
aPathways  with  p-values  ＜ 0.05  from  Fisher's  exact  test.

Table  2.  Annotations  for  a  cancer  gene  provided  by  CaGe

Name

Description

Example

Basic  cancer  gene  annotations

Gene  set

Gene  symbol
Tumor  type
Cell  type
Mutation  type
Cancer  syndrome

Source  database  for  known  cancer  genes  or  cancer 
    related  genes
Standard  gene  symbol
Type  of  tumor  as  mutation  source
Cell  type  where  mutation  occurs
Type  of  reported  mutation　
Cancer  syndrome

CGC/CGI/CGC_PATH/CGI_PATH

ABL/ABL2/BRCA2
AML/Prostate/Breast/Ovarian
Somatic/Germline
Missense/Translocation/Deletion
Familial  blastoma

Additional  functional  annotations

Gene  symbol  (Gene  ID)
Full  name
Alias

Gene  symbol  (Entrez  gene  ID)
Full  description  of  gene
Other  gene  symbols

Position

Database  links

Chromosome  band  where  the  gene  having  the  mutation 
    is  located
Identifiers  (IDs)  with  hyperlinks  to  the  public  gene  and 
    protein  annotation  databases

Molecular  Genetics
Tissue  type
Related  pathways

Type  of  inheritance
Tissue  type  of  tumor
Pathways  where  the  gene  is  assigned

BHD  (201163)
Folliculin,  Birt-Hogg-Dube  syndrome
BHD, DKFZp547A118, FLCL, FLJ45004, 
  FLJ99377, MGC17998
17p11.2

HGNC:  27310;
OMIM:  607273;
Ensembl:  ENSG00000154803;
HPRD:  06278;
UniProt:  BHD
Recessive/Dominant
E  (epithelial),  M  (mesenchymal)
Purine  metabolism  (KEGG)  by  Cancer  Gene 

Census  (CGC)  gene  set

38 Genomics  &  Informatics Vol.  10(1)  33-39,  March  2012

pathway  gene  database  were  constructed  by  the  de-
scribed  methods.  In  total,  436  CGC-originated  and  7181 
CGI-originated  cancer  genes  were  prepared  for  the  re-
ported  cancer  gene  annotation.  Additionally,  5,790 
CGC-based  and  6,744  CGI-based  cancer  pathway 
genes  were  assigned  for  the  annotation  of  unreported 
but  potential  candidate  genes  (Table  1).  The  gene  ID 
database  for  gene  symbol  conversion,  based  on  HGNC, 
and  the  functional  annotation  database,  based  on  Entrez 
Gene  and  UniProt  database  flat  files,  were  constructed. 
The  types  of  annotations  provided  by  CaGe  are  sum-
marized  in  Table  2.
    The  main  window  of  the  CaGe  web  interface  is 
shown  in  Fig.  2  for  the  cancer  gene  annotation  process. 
Main  menus,  located  in  the  upper  part  of  the  main  win-
dow,  are  linked  to  the  four  main  functions  and  home 
page  of  the  system:  1)  home  page,  2)  cancer  gene  an-
notation  function,  3)  cancer  pathway  annotation  func-
tion,  4)  cancer  gene  browsing  function,  and  5)  cancer 
pathway  browsing  function.  Detailed  usages  for  CaGe 
are  described  in  the  user’s  guide  at  http://mgrc.kribb. 
re.kr/cage/include/cageUserGuide.pdf.

nogenesis  of  SCLC.  Thus,  we  conclude  that  CaGe  can 
annotate  cancer  genes  effectively  and  suggest  that 
CaGe  will  be  useful  in  the  identification  of  cancer-caus-
ing  mutations  and  genes  in  HGT-based  cancer  geno-
mics.
    In  this  paper,  we  present  a  new  cancer  genomic  tool, 
CaGe,  for  the  assessment  of  candidate  cancer  genes 
having  somatic  mutations 
from  HGT-based  cancer 
genomics.  CaGe  provides  users  with  information  on 
cancer  genes,  mutations,  pathways,  and  associated  an-
notations  through  cancer  gene  annotation,  cancer  path-
way  annotation,  cancer  gene  browsing,  and  cancer 
pathway  browsing  functions.  It  has  a  capacity  to  proc-
ess  SIFT  or  PolyPhen  output  files  as  direct  input  for 
usual  NGS-based  cancer  genomics  flows.  Researchers 
can  classify  their  candidate  genes  from  cancer  genome 
studies  into  previously  known  or  novel  categories  of 
cancer  genes  and  gain  insight  into  the  underlying  carci-
nogenic  mechanisms  through  a  pathway  analysis.  We 
hope  that  CaGe  will  be  useful  for  the  identification  of 
cancer-causing  mutations  and  genes  in  HGT-based  can-
cer  genomics.

System  information

Supplementary  materials

CaGe  was  developed  using  PHP,  R,  and  python  lan-
guages;  MySQL  for  database  management;  and  Apache 
for  the  web  server  and  is  operated  on  a  Linux  platform 
with  8-core  Intel  Xeon  CPUs  (2.33  GHz)  and  24  GB  of 
main  memory.

Performance  evaluation  with  small  cell  lung  can-
cer  mutation  data

To  assess  the  capability  of  CaGe,  we  annotated  genes 
from  candidate  mutations  for  a  small  cell  lung  cancer 
genome  (SCLC)  [12].  We  had  59  genes  with  predicted 
functionally  damaging  mutations  after  applying  22,910 
mutations  to  the  PolyPhen  and  could  annotate  22  pre-
viously  reported  known  cancer  genes  successfully  by 
applying  the  PolyPhen  output  for  CaGe.  Known  cancer 
genes  included  RB1,  which  was  mentioned  as  an 
SCLC-related  gene  in  Pleasance’s  work; DST  and ETS2, 
which  were  previously  reported  as  SCLC-related  genes 
but  not  mentioned  in  Pleasance’s  work;  and  3  more 
genes  (PDGFC, IL16,  and AGTR2),  which  are  known  as 
lung  cancer-related  genes  (Supplementary  Table  1).  The 
other  16  genes  are  known  to  be  related  to  other  cancer 
types,  suggesting  that  they  might  be  important  in  the 
carcinogenesis  of  SCLC  as  well.  From  the  pathway 
analysis,  we  identified  12  known  cancer  genes  and  11 
genes  in  cancer-related  pathways  (Supplementary  Table 
2).  Those  11  genes  might  also  be  important  in  the  carci-

Supplementary  data  including  two  tables  can  be  found 
with  this  article  online  at  http://www.genominfo.org/ 
html/UploadFile/article5_201203_SP.pdf.

Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  KRIBB 
Research  Initiative  Program  and  from  the  Ministry  of 
Education,  Science  and  Technology 
(2010- 
0012810)  of  the  Republic  of  Korea.  D.L.  was  supported 
by  the  Basic  Research  Laboratory  grant  (2009-0086964) 
of  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology 
through  the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea,  and 
Korea  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology  Information 
(KISTI).

(MEST) 

References
1. Meyerson  M,  Gabriel  S,  Getz  G.  Advances  in  under-
standing  cancer  genomes  through  second-generation 
sequencing.  Nat Rev Genet  2010;11:685-696.

2. Zang  ZJ,  Ong  CK,  Cutcutache  I,  Yu  W,  Zhang  SL, 
Huang  D,  et al.  Genetic  and  structural  variation  in  the 
gastric  cancer  kinome  revealed  through  targeted  deep 
sequencing.  Cancer Res  2011;71:29-39.

3. Futreal  PA,  Coin  L,  Marshall  M,  Down  T,  Hubbard  T, 
Wooster  R,  et al.  A  census  of  human  cancer  genes. 
Nat Rev Cancer  2004;4:177-183.

4. Forbes  SA,  Bindal  N,  Bamford  S,  Cole  C,  Kok  CY, 

Beare  D,  et al.  COSMIC:  mining  complete  cancer  ge-
nomes 
in 
Cancer.  Nucleic Acids Res  2011;39:D945-D950.

the  Catalogue  of  Somatic  Mutations 

in 

5. Huang  da  W,  Sherman  BT,  Lempicki  RA.  Systematic 
and  integrative  analysis  of  large  gene  lists  using  DAVID 
bioinformatics  resources.  Nat Protoc  2009;4:44-57.

6. Zeeberg  BR,  Qin  H,  Narasimhan  S,  Sunshine  M,  Cao 
H,  Kane  DW,  et al.  High-Throughput  GoMiner,  an  'in-
dustrial-strength'  integrative  gene  ontology  tool  for  in-
terpretation  of  multiple-microarray  experiments,  with  ap-
plication  to  studies  of  Common  Variable  Immune  Defi-
ciency  (CVID).  BMC Bioinformatics  2005;6:168.

7. Beissbarth  T,  Speed  TP.  GOstat:  find  statistically  over-
represented  Gene  Ontologies  within  a  group  of  genes. 
Bioinformatics  2004;20:1464-1465.

8. Khatri  P,  Voichita  C,  Kattan  K,  Ansari  N,  Khatri  A, 
Georgescu  C, et al.  Onto-Tools:  new  additions  and  im-
provements  in  2006.  Nucleic Acids Res  2007;35:W206- 

Cancer  Gene  Annotator 39

W211.

9. Subramanian  A,  Tamayo  P,  Mootha  VK,  Mukherjee  S, 
Ebert  BL,  Gillette  MA, et al.  Gene  set  enrichment  anal-
ysis:  a  knowledge-based  approach  for  interpreting  ge-
nome-wide  expression  profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A  2005;102:15545-15550.

10. Ng  PC,  Henikoff  S.  SIFT:  Predicting  amino  acid 
changes  that  affect  protein  function. Nucleic Acids Res 
2003;31:3812-3814.

11. Adzhubei  IA,  Schmidt  S,  Peshkin  L,  Ramensky  VE, 
Gerasimova  A,  Bork  P,  et al.  A  method  and  server  for 
predicting  damaging  missense  mutations.  Nat Methods 
2010;7:248-249.

12. Pleasance  ED,  Stephens  PJ,  O'Meara  S,  McBride  DJ, 
Meynert  A,  Jones  D, et al.  A  small-cell  lung  cancer  ge-
nome  with  complex  signatures  of  tobacco  exposure. 
Nature  2010;463:184-190.

