Minireview 

Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  3(1)  1-7, March 2005 

DNA Pooling as a Tool for Case-Control Association Studies 
of Complex Traits 

Chul Ahn1*, Terri M.  King\ Kyusang Lee2 and 
Seung-Ho KangJ 

1Department  of  Medicine,  University  of  Texas  Medical 
School,  Houston,  TX  77030,  USA,  2Samsung  Advanced 
Institute  of  Technology,  Seoul  135-71 0,  Korea, 
3Department  of  Statistics,  Ewha  Womans  University, 
Seoul  120-750,  Korea 

Abstract 
Case-control  studies are widely  used for disease gene 
mapping  using  individual  genotyping  data.  However, 
analyses of  large samples  are often  impractical  due to 
the expense of individual  genotyping.  The  use  of  DNA 
pooling  can  significantly 
the  number  of 
genotyping reactions  required;  hence  reducing the cost 
of large-scale case-control association studies. Here, we 
discuss the design and analysis of DNA pooling genetic 
association studies. 

reduce 

Genetic Study 
Two types of statistical methods have been widely used 
to attempt to identify genetic determinants of diseases. 
One is a linkage analysis and the other is an association 
study.  Linkage analysis methods attempt to find out the 
rough  location  of the  disease  gene  relative  to  another 
DNA sequence  called  a  genetic  marker,  which  has  its 
position  on  the  chromosome  already  known.  Linkage 
analysis has been extremely useful in the identification of 
genes  responsible  for diseases  with  simple  Mendelian 
inheritance such as cystic fibrosis (Rommens eta/., 1989). 
Since complex diseases are likely to be influenced by the 
factors  such  as  genetic  heterogeneity,  phenocopies, 
incorrplete penetrance, genotype-by-environment interactions, 
and multi locus effects, the application of linkage analysis 
to complex diseases has been much less successful. 

Complex  diseases  are  likely  to  be  influenced  by 
multiple genes of small effect (Elston, 1995). Association 
studies  provide the  most  powerful  approach to  identify 
such  genes  underlying  complex  traits  (Risch  and 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail Chui.W.Ahn@uth.tmc.edu, 
Tel +1-713-500-6701,  Fax +1-713-500-6722 
Accepted  28 February 2005 

(1996)  have  shown 

Merikangas, 1996). Genetic association studies investigate 
whether  there  is  a  relationship  between  a  "genetic 
marker'' and the frequency or severity of a particular trait. 
Risch  and  Merikangas 
that 
association studies can be a very powerful approach to 
find genetic determinants of a complex disorder. Genetic 
association  studies  have  been  applied  in  a  variety  of 
complex  human  diseases  such  as  cancer,  alcoholism, 
pulmonary  disease,  heart  disease,  diabetes  and 
Alzheimer disease (Silverman and Palmer,  2000;  Risch 
and Merikangas,  1996; Chakravarti,  1999). 

Association Studies 
Different  experimental  designs  can  be  used  to  conduct 
genetic association studies. Cohort studies prospectively 
assemble a group of individuals, and then follow them to 
determine the frequency of developing disease.  Cohort 
studies investigate the frequency of the  DNA variant in 
the  entire  cohort  for  the  estimation  of  risk  ratio  and 
predictive values. Cohort studies are labor intensive and 
costly. However, phenotype may be more clearly defined 
for genetic analysis through the use of longitudinal data 
due  to  the  ability to  observe  the  natural  history  of  the 
disease and potentially significant comorbidities. This is 
an  important  issue  in  complex  human  disease  since 
research  into  such  diseases  can  be  complicated  by 
phenotype heterogeneity. Cohort studies are potentially 
less  prone to ascertainment bias than  are case-control 
studies,  although  geographic  and  population  factors 
must be examined explicitly. 

Case-control designs for genetic association studies 
are  not  different  in  conception  from  the  case-control 
designs  that  have  been  well  developed  for  use  in 
epidemiological methods (Romero eta/., 2002). Case-control 
studies  examine  the  frequency  of  a  DNA  variant  in 
individuals affected by a disease (cases) and in those not 
affected  by the disorder (controls).  Genetic association 
studies  have  been  mostly  performed  in  a  case-control 
setting  with  unrelated  affected  subjects compared  with 
unrelated unaffected subjects.  Significant differences in 
allele  frequencies  or  genotype  frequencies  between 
cases and controls are taken as evidence for involvement 
of an allele or genotype in disease susceptibility. 

Case-control  studies  are  potentially  susceptible  to 
bias if case and controls are not in fact comparable. One 

2  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1)  1-7, March 2005 

source of this bias arises due to population stratification. 
Population stratification occurs when  the differences in 
gene  frequency  are  wholly  or  partially  attributable  to 
inherent underlying population structures between cases 
and controls rather than to association between disease 
and gene. Case-control studies are also susceptible to a 
spurious  association  by  a  false-positive  result  due  to 
chance.  The  problem  is  particularly  acute  for  studies 
involving a large number of markers, such as are used in 
regional  or  genome-wide  association  studies.  This 
association will be less likely if a very stringent threshold 
for  significance  is  met.  Risch  and  Merikangas  (1996) 
suggest a Bonferroni correction with a p-value of 5x1 o·8 
to  demonstrate  a  significant  association  if  one  million 
SNPs  (single  nucleotide  polymorphisms)  were  typed 
across the genome. 'Mlile Bonferroni corrections (Bonferroni, 
1936)  are  often  used  when  multiple  associations  are 
measured  in  a  study,  there  are  some  features  of  a 
genetic  association  study  which  make  it  unattractive. 
Bonferroni corrections are estimated by dividing the type 
I error rate  (a)  by the  number of tests performed;  after 
this procedure,  a test is significant only if the p-value is 
less than  this adjusted type  I error rate.  However,  with 
the number of tests done in a typical genetic association 
study,  it  is  clear  that  the  Bonferroni  correction  can 
significantly lower power for detecting true association. 
The  correction  also  does  not  account  for the  fact  that 
often  the  test  statistics  of  markers  located  in  near 
proximity are not independent test and are, in fact highly 
correlated.  For instance,  investigating 2  SNPs that are 
50  kb  apart  are  likely  highly  correlated  due  to  linkage 
disequilibrium.  To  address  this  issue,  Kaplan  et  a/. 
(1997) and Mcintyre eta/. (2000) have proposed a Monte 
Carlo  approach  for  evaluating  associations  within  the 
transmission/disequilibrium  test  (TDT)  construct  for  a 
single locus and multilocus tests,  respectively. 

The case-control  study remains a popular approach 
in  genetic epidemiology since case-control  studies are 
economically  and  statistically  efficient.  Even  though 
ascertainment  of  disease,  selection  of  controls,  and 
measurement of exposure present substantial difficulties 
in most case-control studies, a large body of epidemiologic 
theory provides guidance to meet these challenges. Bias 
arising from population stratification should be mitigated 
by  proper  design  and  analysis  of  case-control  studies 
and by new statistical methods such as genomic control. 
This  method,  proposed  by  Devlin  and  Roeder  (1999), 
does not require information about the genealogy of the 
population  and  corrects  for  population  heterogeneity, 
poor choice of controls, and cryptic relatedness of cases. 
The  validity of  genetic  association  studies  depends 
on the selection of appropriate controls since misclassification 

of controls leads to a false-negative result. Controls may 
be pre-symptomatic or asyr11Jtornatic instead of disease-free 
for disease such as stroke which tends to have an advanced 
age of onset. Small cerebral infarctions are visible only in CT 
scans.  So,  the  subjects  classified  as  controls  may  have 
asymptomatic  disease.  Therefore,  as  with  standard 
epidemiologic  studies,  phenotypic  characterizations  of 
controls and cases are crucial. Care and attention in the 
design, such as having older controls (i.e., outside of the 
risk profile) can  mitigate this bias.  Unlike risk factors  in 
traditional  case-control  studies,  genes do not have the 
potential for risk factor recall  bias. 

Population Substructure in 
Case-Control Studies 
Population stratification is a form of confounding (Wacholder 
et a/.,  2000) that may cause spurious associations in a 
case-control  study when allelic frequencies vary across 
subpopulations within the study sample. 

In  association  studies,  the  standard  methods  for 
dealing with  potential confounding effects are matching 
and  statistical  adjustment.  In  association  studies  using 
DNA  pools  from  many  individuals,  significant  causal 
disease  associations  may  not  be  distinguished  from 
associations due to the differences in confounding factors 
between cases and controls. Thus, matching by confounding 
factors  prior  to  DNA  pooling  is  essential.  Population 
stratification may be solved by using matched case-control 
designs  which  match  controls  to  cases  on  potential 
confounding factors such as age, sex, and ethnicity, etc. 
That is,  DNA pools needs to be matched to have similar 
socio-demographic composition  to  minimize the  risk of 
spurious associations due to confounding. Then, allele(cid:173)
frequency estimates in the matched DNA pools will give 
a more reliable indication of causal disease association. 
Statistical  methods are  proposed to adequately control 
for  population  stratification  (Devlin  and  Roeder,  1999; 
Pritchard and Rosenberg,  1999; Pritchard eta/., 2000). 
When  a disorder has known  risk factors,  it might be 
desirable to construct multiple pools so that pools differ 
in the level of exposure to the risk factors. Use of multiple 
pools incorporating risk factors might increase the power 
to detect an allelic association with disease. However,  it 
can  be  argued  that  the  use  of  multiple  pools  can  be 
avoided  by  using  the  risk  factors  as  covariates  in  the 
statistical  analysis  at  the  second  stage  since  DNA 
pooling is used as a screen to be followed by individual 
genotyping. 

Family-based  case-control  designs  can  be  used  to 
solve  the  stratification  problem.  That  is,  stratification 
problem can be solved using parents as controls or using 

DNA Pooling as a Tool for Case-Control Association Studies of Complex Traits  3 

unaffected  sibs  as  controls.  However,  family-based 
case-control  designs  are  more  expensive  than  the 
case-control designs using controls that are unrelated to 
the  cases.  Family-based  designs  will  have  less  power 
compared  to  a well-designed  study involving  unrelated 
controls. 

can  significantly  reduce  the  number  of  genotyping 
reactions  required;  hence  reducing  the  cost  of  large(cid:173)
scale  case-control  association  studies,  and  offering  an 
approach to this economic impasse.  Furthermore,  DNA 
pooling  can  be  an  extremely  effective  method  for 
conserving precious DNA. 

Issues in Genetic Case-Control study 
Genetic case-control study still poses great challenges. 
One  of the  difficulties  is  to  obtain  the  large  number of 
genotypes  needed.  Additionally,  sample  sizes  of 
hundreds or even thousands of subjects may be needed 
to  achieve  statistical  power  to  detect  loci  with  modest 
effect size. 

Genetic association studies using a set of SNPs that 
covers  the  human  genome  densely  would  be  very 
expensive,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  most  laboratories 
even  though  the  cost  of  large-scale  single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) determination dropped dramatically 
in recent years. As a result, the development of innovative 
study designs that reduce the cost is warranted. 

versus 

Haplotype-tagging  SNPs  and  DNA  pooling  have 
potential  to  reduce  the  cost  barriers  of  the  genetic 
association study. Botstein and Risch (2003) provide an 
excellent  review  for  the  comparison  of  genome-wide 
haplotype  map-based 
sequenced-based 
strategies. The use of haplotype-tagging SNPs is a rrap-based 
approach  while  DNA  pooling  is  a  sequenced-based 
approach.  A comprehensive map-based approach  may 
require genotyping 1 0-fold more SNPs than a sequence(cid:173)
based  approach  (500,000-1 ,000,000  for  map- based 
versus  50,000-100,000  for  sequenced-based}.  Bostein 
and  Risch  (2003}  suggest a sequence-based approach 
for the initial stage of a major program aimed at genome(cid:173)
wide association studies. Bansal eta/. (2002) demonstrate 
the  potential  of  a  sequence-based  DNA  pooling 
techniques  and  their  associated  technologies  as  an 
initial screen in the search for genetic association. 

DNA Pooling 
The use of DNA pooling technique has been proposed as 
a means of reducing the number of genotyping reactions 
large-scale 
required,  hence 
case-control  association  studies.  DNA  pooling  is  a 
powerful and efficient tool for high throughput association 
analysis.  DNA  pooling  allows  measurement  of  allele 
frequencies  in  groups  (or pools}  of  individuals,  thereby 
reducing the  number of  PCR  reactions  and  genotyping 
assays dramatically. Therefore, the use of DNA pooling 

the  cost  of 

reducing 

for  detecting 

The  most  powerful  methods 

the 
association between a marker and a phenotype require 
individual  genotyping.  Experimental  savings  can  be 
achieved by testing allele frequency differences between 
DNA  pools  chosen  by  phenotypic  value  (Darvasi  and 
Soller,  1994; Barcellos et at,  1997). In  DNA pooling, the 
equal  amounts  of  DNA from  each  subject  are  used  to 
create a  pool  to  estimate the  allele  frequency.  That  is, 
DNA of individuals is mixed together to generate a pool 
before estimating allele frequencies. In general, one pool 
is created out of all cases and a second out of all controls 
in  a  case-control  study.  Allele  frequencies  are  then 
estimated  in  each  pool  and  compared  directly between 
two pools.  Various  methods  have  been  used  for allele 
including  mass  spectrometry, 
frequency  estimation, 
liquid  chromatography 
denaturing  high-performance 
(HPLC), and photo-lithography. Whatever the method of 
estimating  allele  frequency  is  used,  allele  frequencies 
are  estimated  in  each  DNA  pool  by  quantifying  the 
relative  amounts  of  DNA  products  representing  each 
allele. 

In  DNA  pooling,  allele  frequency  is  measured  in  a 
large number of SNP markers in each of the pools as an 
efficient screen to enrich for SNPs with significant allele 
frequency differences  (Bansal  eta/., 2002).  The  SNPs 
with the large allele-frequency differences in the pooled 
data  are  then  selected  for  individual  genotyping.  The 
pooled genotyping step reduces the number of SNPs that 
must  be  individually  genotyped  to  confirm  allele-frequency 
differences between cases and controls.  The larger the 
sample,  the  greater the  saving,  so that the design with 
minimal  genotyping  would  involve  comparing  just  two 
pools,  each containing DNA from numerous individuals. 
These two  pools  could  be  constituted  from  cases  and 
controls for a disease trait,  or from  individuals with trait 
values at the two extremes of a quantitative trait. 

For the quantitative traits such as blood pressure and 
cholesterol  levels,  Bader  et a/.  (2001)  provide  power 
estimates for two pooled DNA designs which classify the 
individuals  as  affected  or  unaffected,  analogous  to  a 
case-control design. The optimal design for the quantitative 
phenotypes  is  to  pool  the  top  and  bottom  27%  of 
individuals. This  optimal design requires  a sample size 
only  1.24 times  larger than  that  required  for  individual 
genotyping when we ignore the experimental measurement 
error. When a measurement error is included, the pooled 

4  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1)  1-7, March 2005 

DNA  association  test  serves  well  as  a  pre-screen  to 
identify  candidate  markers  which  then  proceed  to 
individual genotyping. This DNA pooling strategy can still 
provide a substantial savings over individual genotyping. 
There  are  disparate  recommendations  on  the  pool 
sizes in DNA pooling. While Barratt eta/. (2002) suggest 
the pool sizes of 50 or fewer, Mohlke eta/. (2002) and Le 
Hellard eta/. (2002) suggest larger pool size of up to 500 
cases  and  500  controls.  Feng  et a/.  (2004)  thinks  the 
larger  pool  sizes  are  preferable  since  the  quality  of 
frequency  estimates  does  not  seem  to  degrade  with 
larger  pool  size.  Effect  of  pool  sizes  on  DNA  pooling 
needs to be investigated. 

There are some potential error sources in the stages 
of DNA quantification and formation of pools (Barratt et 
a/.,  2002).  One  of  the  potential  error  sources  is  that 
alleles  with  different  sequences  may  not  be  amplified 
equally in the competitive reaction. Many high-throughput 
genotyping platforms measure the amount of each allele 
from  competitive  amplification  reaction,  and  determine 
the  genotype  based  on  the  abundance  of  alleles.  A 
standard procedure is to genotype some heterozygotes 
individually  using  competitive  reaction  and  then  to 
estimate  the  average  relative  speed  of  amplification 
reaction from the experimentally. If each allele of an SNP 
site is equally represented  in  the assay,  the ratio (k)  of 
the  amplifications  of  competing  alleles  would  be  one. 
The  frequency  of  allele  A  in  a  pool  can  be  estimated 
more accurately as A/(A+k · B),  where A and B are the 
measured  abundance  of  alleles  corresponding  to  two 
polymorphic alleles at the SNP locus. Another potential 
error sources are  due to  unequal  amounts of  DNA per 
individual and due to experimental errors. 

The foundation of successful DNA pooling association 
test  is  a  precise  and  accurate  estimation  of  allele 
frequency.  Tang  eta/. (2004)  show that the SNP allele 
frequency estimates from pooled analysis are comparable 
to  those  from  individual  genotyping.  The  coefficient  of 
determination  (R-square)  of  the  frequency  estimates 
between DNA pooling and individual genotyping is 0.975 
using individual heterozygous samples. The quantitative 
abilities  of various  platforms  used  for  estimating  allele 
frequencies are confirmed by multiple studies (Sham et 
a/.,  2002;  Le  Hellard  eta/., 2002;  Shifman  eta/., 2002; 
Moskvina eta/., in press). Mohlke eta/. (2002) provide an 
example  of  comparison  of  SNP  allele 
frequency 
estimates  from  pooled  analysis  and  from  individual 
genotyping. 

Due to the dramatic reduction in the large-scale SNP 
determination,  the  cost  of  SNP  determination  is  now 
approximately  1  cent  per  SNP  (Feng  et  a/.,  2004). 
Epidemiologic genetic association studies would be still 

prohibitively expensive even though the genotyping cost 
has  recently  dropped  dramatically.  Feng  eta/.  (2004) 
describe that genotyping of 2 million SNPs for 500 cases 
and 500 matched controls would cost about $20 million. 
When a single case and a single control pools are used 
for pooled analysis, the minor allele frequency analysis 
for 2 million SNPs can be obtained at a genotyping cost 
of about $40,000.  If quadruplicate frequency estimation 
is  obtained  from  the  single  case  and  control  pools, 
genotype  cost  will  be  approximately  $160,000.  DNA 
pooling  technique  has the  potential  to  reduce  the  cost 
barrier of the large-scale genetic association study. 

It is expected that the differences in allele frequencies 
between  cases  and  controls  may  be  only  small  in  the 
analysis of complex disease. Therefore, the success of 
DNA  pooling  crucially  depends  on  reproducibility  and 
high  accuracy in the estimation of allele frequencies of 
cases  and  controls.  Replicates  are  needed  for  each 
reaction in order to achieve high accuracy. 

Statistical Analysis 
The  most  effective  use  of  DNA  pooling  might  be  a 
two-stage design in which  markers that show evidence 
of association from the pooled association are followed 
up  by  individual  genotyping.  Allele  frequencies  are 
separately estimated from cases and controls at the first 
stage, and then individual genotyping will be done for the 
selected  markers  with 
large  allele-frequency 
differences at the second  stage.  Thus,  pooling  can  be 
used as an  efficient and sensitive method of screening 
numerous  markers  to  identify  a  subset  of  markers  for 
more detailed studies. 

the 

A common observation with the use of DNA pools is 
that  two  alleles  at  a  polymorphic  SNP  locus  are  not 
amplified in equal amounts in  heterozygous individuals 
depending on the design of assay.  In addition, there are 
pool-specific  errors  so  that  there  is  variation  in  the 
estimates of allele frequencies from different pools that 
are  from  the  same  individuals.  As  a  result  of  these 
additional  sources  of  variation,  the  outcome  of  an 
experiment is an  estimated count of alleles  rather than 
the usual outcome in terms of observed counts. 

In  the  first  stage,  the  simple  method  to  analyze 
SNP-based case-control association studies using DNA 
pooling is to multiply the estimated allele frequencies by 
the number of chromosomes in the pool  and perform a 
chi-square  test.  This  simple  chi-square  test  has  been 
used in several published studies (Shifman eta/., 2002; 
Williams eta/., 2002; Norton eta/., 2003, 2004). Visscher 
and Le Hellard (2003) and Le Hellard eta/. (2002) show 
that  simply  substituting  estimated  count  for  observed 

DNA Pooling as a Tool for Case-Control Association Studies of Complex Traits  5 

count can lead to an inflation of type I error rates due to 
unequal  amplification  in  DNA  pooling.  Adjustment was 
made  to  account  for  unequal  amplification  by  various 
researchers  (Mohlke  et  a/.  2002;  Yang  et  a/.,  2005; 
Visscher and Le Hellard, 2003). Visscher and Le Hellard 
(2003)  modify 
test  by 
incorporating the variation  inflation factor to control  the 
type  I  error  rate  in  the  presence  of  experimental 
variation. 

the  standard  chi-square 

As an alternative approach for the analysis of pooled 
data,  Visscher and  Le  Hellard (2003)  suggest an  over(cid:173)
dispersed model, which is widely used for the analysis of 
clustered binary data in statistical literatures (Ahn  eta/., 
2003; Jung eta/., 2001; Kang eta/., 2003). The parameters 
from the over-dispersed model can be estimated from a 
nested  design  of  population  samples  and  replicated 
pools within samples.  Kang  eta/. (2004) investigate the 
allelic chi-square test used in genetic association studies 
in  terms  of  empirical  type  I  error  rates  and  empirical 
powers. 

If the large allele-frequency differences are observed 
in  the  pools  of  cases  and  controls,  genotyping  is 
performed  individually.  One  of  the  important  issues  in 
DNA  pooling  study  is  the  selection  of  markers  to  be 
genotyped 
individually.  Development  of  statistical 
methods is needed to  determine methods for selecting 
markers  to  proceed  to  the  second  stage.  Konig  and 
Ziegler  (2004)  propose  decision-theoretic  models  to 
determine  individual  genotyping  based  on  the  results 
from pooled DNA.  Bonferroni correction, false discovery 
rate (FOR) or related concepts can be also used for the 
selection of markers to move to the second stage.  In the 
second stage,  genotyping is  performed  individually and 
markers are analyzed conventionally. A more comprehensive 
control of confounding factors can be done at the second 
stage. The second stage can enable the study of gene-gene 
interactions and gene-environment interactions. 

The importance of correcting for multiple comparisons 
in genomic screens is well known (Lander and Kruglyak, 
1995).  Benjamini  and  Hochberg  (1995)  introduce  the 
false discovery rate (FOR) tor multiple testing situations. 
Sabatti  et a/.  (2003)  show  that  the  simple  step-down 
procedure  introduced  by  Benjamini  and  Hochberg 
(1995)  controls  the  FOR  tor  the  dependent  tests  on 
which  association  genome  screens  are  based  through 
simulation. 

Even though complex diseases are generally caused 
by multiple genetic variations, most available association 
methods  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  a  single 
genetic variation is primarily responsible for the disease 
under study. Only a few approaches consider interactions 
of multiple genes and environmental factors in identifying 

susceptibility loci tor complex disease (Hoh eta/., 2001; 
Ritchie eta/., 2001; Nelson eta!., 2001; Kim eta/., 2003; 
Hao eta/., 2004).  Hoh eta/. (2001) develop a novel test 
procedure, called a set association approach, to identify 
genetic variation responsible for complex diseases when 
multiple genes are involved. This approach is appropriate 
for many study designs,  such  as  case-control,  trio  and 
extended families. The method uses a score statistic that 
is weighted by the allele contribution to a Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium measurement. All alleles are jointly estimated 
and  the  minimal  p-value  identities  the  combination  of 
alleles, across genes that appear to act in concert to alter 
the  risk  of  disease.  They  applied  the  set  association 
approach to a real  restenosis data set and could identify 
several SNPs of interest that were in linkage disequilibrium 
with susceptibility locus tor restenosis, and there-blockage 
of the coronary after treatment. Zee eta/. (2002) use this 
approach  to  define  a  panel  of  contributory  genes  in 
instant restenosis.  Hoh eta/. (2001) did not evaluate the 
empirical the type I errors and empirical powers of the set 
association  approach.  Hao  eta/.  (2004)  systematically 
evaluate the performances of multiple SNP association 
test in terms of power and accuracy in capturing the real 
disease SNPs. Hao eta/. (2004) show that the inclusion 
of  Hardy-Weinberg  Disequilibrium  (HWD)  reduces  the 
power  through  simulation.  They  demonstrate  that  the 
test procedure could capture the SNPs associated with 
disease fairly successfully. 

Romero  et  at.  (2002)  propose  guidelines  tor  the 
evaluation  of  reports  of  genetic  association  studies 
including  selection  of  SNPs,  study  design,  assay 
characteristics, sample size determination, multiple tests 
and  statistical  analysis.  Proposed  guidelines  tor  the 
reporting of genetic association studies facilitate the peer 
review process,  publication,  and availability of the data 
tor future studies and systematic reviews. 

through 

Conclusion 
DNA  pooling  technique  is  ideal  tor  screening  a  large 
number  of  markers  tor  associations  although  positive 
results  will  require  confirmation 
individual 
genotyping.  Considerable  savings  can  be  achieved 
concerning DNA, cost and labor through the use of DNA 
pooling.  All  markers  identified  in  the  initial  discovery 
process are subjected to a follow-up program. Additional 
work is necessary to eliminate false-positive associations 
that  are  likely  due  to  sampling  errors  and  potential 
population substructures. The most powerful  method  is 
the  application  of  observations 
in  one  or  more 
independent  samples.  That  is,  replicate  studies  using 
pooled  DNA from two or more studies are  expected to 

6  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1)  1-7, March 2005 

play an efficient role in eliminating false positive findings, 
and 
identification  of  meaningful 
association. 

the  efficient 

for 

Considerable cost reduction can be achieved through 
the  use  of  DNA  pooling,  whereby  DNA samples  from 
multiple  individuals  are  pooled  before  genotyping.  It  is 
suggested  that  DNA  pooling  should  be  considered 
especially in the initial stages of a major program aimed 
at  genome-wide  association  studies  since  large-scale 
association  studies can  be accelerated with  the  use of 
DNA pooling. 

References 
Ahn,  C.,  Jung,  S.,  and  Kang,  S.  (2003).  An  evaluation  of 
weighted chi-square statistics for site specific data. Drug 
Information Journa/37, 91-99. 

Bader,  J.,  Bansal,  A.,  and  Sham,  P.  (2001).  Efficient 
for  quantitative 

SNP-based 
phenotypes using pooled DNA.  Genescreen 143-150. 

test  of  association 

Bansal,  A.,  Boom,  D.,  Krammerer,  S.,  Hanisch,  C.,  Adam, 
G.,  Cantor,  C.,  Kleyn,  P.,  and  Braun,  A.  (2002). 
Association  testing  by  DNA pooling:  An  effective  initial 
screen.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 99,16871-1687 4. 

Barcellos,  L.F.,  Klitz,  W.,  Field,  L.L.,  Tobias,  R.,  Bowcock, 
A.M.,  Wilson,  R.,  Nelson,  M.P.,  Nagatomi,  J.,  and 
Thomson,  G.  (1997).  Association  mapping  of  disease 
loci, by use of a pooled DNA genomic screen. American 
Journal of Human Genetics 61,734-747. 

Barratt,  B.J.,  Payne,  F.,  Rance,  H.E.,  Nutland,  S.,  Todd, 
J.A.,  and  Clayton,  D.G.  (2002).  Identification  of  the 
sources  of  error  in  allele  frequency  estimations  from 
pooled  DNA  indicates an  optimal  experimental  design. 
Annals of Human Genetics 66,393-405. 

Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false 
discovery  rate:  a  practical  and  powerful  approach  to 
multiple testing. Journal of Royal Statistical Society 8 57, 
289-300. 

Bonferroni,  C.E.  (1936).  Teoria  statistica  delle  classi  e 
calcolo  delle  probabilit?  Pubblicazioni  del  R  lstituto 
Superiore  di  Scienze  Economiche  e  Commerciali  di 
Firenze 8,3-62. 

Botstein,  D.  and  Risch,  N.  (2003).  Discovering  genotypes 
underlying  human  phenotypes:  past  successes  for 
Mendelian  disease,  future  approaches  for  complex 
disease.  Nature Genetics 33, Suppl. S228-S237. 

Chakravarti,  A.  (1999).  Population genetics-making sense 
out of sequence. Nature Genetics 21 , Suppl.1 , S56-S60. 
Darvasi, A. and Soller, M. (1994). Selective DNA pooling for 
determination  of  linkage  between  a  molecular  marker 
and a quantitative trait locus.  Genetics 138, 1365-1373. 
Devlin,  B.  and  Roeder,  K.  (1999).  Genomic  control  for 

association studies. Biometrics 55, 997-1004. 

Elston,  R.  (1995).  The  genetic  dissection  of  multifactorial 

traits.  C/in.  Exp.  Allergy 2,  1 03-1 06. 

Feng, Z., Prentice, R., and Srivastava, S. (2004).  Research 
issues  and  strategies  for  genomic  and  proteomic 
biomarker  discovery  and  validation:  a  statistical 
perspective.  Pharmacogenomics 5, 709-719. 

Hao,  K.,  Laid,  N.,  Wang,  X.,  and  Xu,  X.  (2004).  Power 
test  of 
application.  Genetic 

estimation  of  multiple  SNP  association 
case-control 
Epidemiology 26, 22-30. 

study 

and 

Hoh, J., Wille,  A., and Ott, J.  (2001). Trimming,  weighting, 
and  grouping SNPs in  human case-control  association 
studies.  Genome Research 11 , 2115-2119. 

Jung,  S.,  Ahn,  C., and Donner, A.  (2001).  Evaluation of an 
adjusted  chi-square  statistic  applied  to  observational 
studies  involving  a  clustered  binary  data.  Statistics  in 
Medicine20, 2149-2161. 

Kang,  S.,  Ahn,  C.,  and  Jung,  S.  (2003).  Sample  size 
calculations  in  cluster randomized  studies with  varying 
cluster size: a binary case.  Drug Information Journa/37, 
109-114. 

Kang,  S.,  Shin,  D.,  Oh,  M.,  and  Ahn,  C.  (2004).  An 
investigation  on  the  allelic  chi-square  test  used  in 
genetic  association  studies.  Biometrical  Journal  46, 
699-706. 

Kaplan,  N.L.,  Martin,  E.R.,  and  Weir,  B.S.  (1997).  Power 
studies  for  the  transmission/disequilibrium  tests  with 
multiple  alleles.  American Journal of Human  Genetics 
60, 691-702. 

Kim,  S.,  Zhang,  K.,  and  Sun,  F.  (2003).  Detecting 
susceptibility  genes  in  case-control  studies  using  set 
association.  BMC Genetics 4,  Suppl.  1 , S9. 

Konig,  I. and Ziegler, A.  (2004). Analysis of SNPs in pooled 
DNA: a decision theoretic model.  Genetic Epidemiology 
26,31-43. 

Lander,  E.  and  Kruglyak,  L.  (1995).  Genetic dissection  of 
complex traits:  guidelines for interpreting and  reporting 
linkage results.  Nature Genetics 11, 241-247. 

Le  Hellard,  S.,  Ballereau,  S.,  Visscher,  P.,  Torrance,  H., 
Pinson,  J.,  Morris,  S.,  Thomson,  M.,  Semple,  C.,  Muir, 
W.,  Blackwood,  D.,  Porteous,  D., and Evans, K.  (2002). 
SNP  genotyping  on  pooled  DNAs:  comparison  of 
genotyping technologies and a semi automated method 
for data storage and analysis.  Nucleic Acids Research 
30, e74. 

Moskvina, V., Norton, N., Williams, N., Holmans, P., Owen, 
M.,  and O'Donovan,  M.  Streamlined analysis of pooled 
genotype  data  in  SNP-based  association  studies. 
Genetic Epidemiology ~n press). 

Mcintyre,  L.M.,  Martin,  E.R.,  Simonsen,  K.L.,  and  Kaplan, 
N.L. (2000). Circumventing multiple testing: a multi locus 

DNA Pooling as a Tool for Case-Control Association Studies of Complex Traits  7 

Monte Carlo approach. Genetic Epidemiology 19, 18-29. 
Mohlke,  K.L.,  Erdos,  M.R.,  Scott,  L.J.,  Fingerlin,  T.E., 
Jackson, A.U.,  Silander,  K.,  Hollstein,  P.,  Boehnke,  M., 
and  Collins,  F.S.  (2002).  High-throughput screening tor 
evidence  of  association  by  using  mass  spectrometry 
genotyping  on  DNA  pools.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
99,  16928-16933. 

Nelson,  M.R.,  Kardia,  S.L.,  Ferell,  R.E.,  and  Sing,  C.F. 
(2001).  A  combinatorial  partitioning  method  to  identity 
multilocus  genotypic  partitions  that  predict  quantitative 
trait variation.  Genome Research 11, 458-470. 

Norton,  N.,  Williams,  H.J.,  Williams,  N.M.,  Spurlock,  G., 
Zammit, S., Jones, G., Jones, S., Owen, R., O'Donovan, 
M.G., and Owen,  M.J. (2003).  Mutation screening of the 
in 
Homer  gene 
schizophrenia.  American  Journal  of Medical  Genetics 
120B,  18-21. 

family  and  association  analysis 

Norton,  N.,  Williams,  N.,  O'Donovan,  M.,  and  Owen,  M. 
(2004). DNA pooling as a tool for large-scale association 
studies  in  complex  traits.  Annals  of  Medicine  36, 
146-152. 

(2000).  Association  mapping 

Pritchard,  J.,  Stephens,  M.,  Rosenberg,  N.,  and  Donnelly, 
P. 
structured 
populations.  American Journal of Human  Genetics 67, 
170-181. 

in 

Pritchard,  J.  and  Rosenberg,  N.  (1999).  Use  of  unlinked 
genetic  markers  to  detect  population  stratification  in 
association  studies.  American  Journal  of  Human 
Genetics 65, 220-228. 

Risch,  N.  and Merikangas,  K.  (1996}. The future of genetic 
studies  of  complex  human  diseases.  Science  273, 
1516-1517. 

F.F., 

J.H. 

Ritchie,  M.D.,  Hahn,  L.W.,  Roodi,  N.,  Bailey,  L.R.,  Dupont, 
W.O.,  Pari, 
(2001). 
Multifactor-dimensionality  reduction  reveals  high-order 
in 
interactions  among  estrogen-metabolism  genes 
sporadic  breast  cancer.  American  Journal  of Human 
Genetics69,  138-147. 

and  Moore, 

Romero,  R.,  Kuivaniemi,  H.,  Tromp,  G.,  and  Olson,  J. 
(2002}.  The  design,  execution,  and  interpretation  of 
genetic  association  studies 
to  decipher  complex 
disease. Am. J.  Obstet.  Gynecol.  187, 1299-1312. 

Rommens, J.M.,  Iannuzzi, M.G.,  Kerem,  B.,  Drumm,  M.L., 
Melmer,  G.,  Dean,  M.,  Rozmahel,  R.,  Cole,  J.L., 
Kennedy,  D.,  Hidaka,  N.,  eta/.  (1989).  Identification of 
cystic fibrosis gene: chromosome walking and jumping. 
Science 245,  1 059-1 065. 

Sabatti,  C.,  Service,  S.,  and  Freimer,  N.  (2003).  False 
discovery  rate  in  linkage  and  associations  genome 

screens for complex disorders.  Genetics 164, 829-833. 
Sham, P.,  Bader, J.S., Craig, 1.,  O'Donovan, M., and Owen, 
M. (2002}. DNA pooling: a tool for large scale association 
studies.  Nature Reviews Genetics 3,  862-871 

Shifman,  S.,  Bronstein,  M.,  Sternfeld,  M.,  Pisante-Shalom, 
A.,  Lev-Lehamn, E., Weizman, A.,  Reznik, 1.,  Spivak, B., 
Grisaru,  N.,  Karp,  L.,  Schiffer,  R.,  Kotler,  M.,  Straus, 
R.D.,  Swartz-Vanetik,  M.,  Knobler,  H.Y.,  Shinar,  E., 
Beckmann,  J.S.,  Yakir,  B.,  Risch,  N.,  Zak,  N.B.,  and 
Darvasi,  A.  (2002).  A  highly  significant  association 
between  a  COMT  haplotype  and  schizophrenia. 
American Journal of Human Genetics 71 , 1296-1302. 

Silverman,  E.  and  Palmer,  L. 

(2000).  Case-control 
association  studies 
the  genetics  of  complex 
respiratory diseases.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Cell.  Mol.  Bioi.  22, 
645-648. 

for 

Tang,  K.,  Oeth,  P.,  Krammerer,  S.,  Denissenko,  M., 
Ekblom, J., Jurinke, C., Boom, D., Braun, A., and Cantor, 
C.  (2004).  Mining  disease susceptibility genes through 
SNP  analyses  and  expression  profiling  using 
MALDI-TOF  mass  spectrometry.  Journal  of Proteome 
Research 3,  218-227. 

Visscher, P.M. and Le Hellard, S.  (2003). Simple method to 
analyze  SNP-based  association  studies  using  DNA 
pools.  Genetic Epidemiology 24, 291-296. 

Wacholder,  S.,  Rothman,  N.,  and  Caporaso,  N.  (2000). 
Population  stratification  in  epidemiologic  studies  of 
common  genetic variants  and  cancer:  quantification  of 
bias.  Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  92, 
1151-1158. 

Williams,  N.M.,  Spurlock,  G.,  Norton,  N.,  Williams,  H.J., 
Hamshere,  M.L.,  Krawczak,  M.,  Kirov,  G.,  Nikolov,  1., 
Georgieva,  L.,  Jones,  S.,  Cardno,  A.G.,  O'Donovan, 
M.G.,  and  Owen,  M.J.  (2002).  Mutation  screening  and 
LD mapping in the VCFS deleted region of chromosome 
22q11 
in  schizophrenia  using  a  novel  DNA  pooling 
approach.  Molecular Psychiatry 7,  1092-1100. 

Yang,  H.C.,  Pan,  C.C.,  Lu,  R.,  and  Fann,  C.  (2005).  New 
adjustment  factors  and  sample  size  calculation  in  a 
DNA-pooling experiment with preferential amplification. 
Genetics 169, 399-410. 

Zee,  R.Y.,  Hoh,  J.,  Cheng,  S.,  Reynolds,  R.,  Grow,  M.A., 
Silbergleit,  A.,  Walker,  K.,  Steiner,  L.,  Zangenberg,  G., 
Fernandez-Ortiz, A., Mayaca, C., Pinto, E., Femandez-Cruz, 
A.,  Ott,  J.,  and  Undpainter,  K  (2002).  Multi-locus 
interactions  predict  risk  for  post-PTCA  restenosis:  an 
approach  to  the  genetic  analysis  of  common  complex 
disease. Pharmacogenomics Jouma/2, 197-201. 

