M INIREVIEW

Genomics  &  Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 41-45, June 2007

Pharmacogenomics in Drug Discovery and Development

Chul Ahn*

Department of Medicine, University of Texas Medical School, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA
1)
Abstract
Pharmacogenomics  is  the  study  that  examines  how 
genetic variations affect the ways in which people respond 
to drugs. The ways people respond to drugs are complex 
traits  that  are  influenced  by  many  different  genes. 
Pharmacogenomics intends to develop rational means of 
optimizing  drug  therapy,  with  respect  to  the  patients' 
genotype, to maximize efficacy with minimal adverse drug 
reactions.  Pharmacogenomics  has  the  potential  to 
revolutionize the practice of medicine, and promises to 
usher in an area of personalized medicine, in which drugs 
and drug combinations are optimized for each individual's 
unique genetic makeup. Indeed, pharmacogenomics is 
exploited as an essential step for target discovery and drug 
development in the pharmaceutical industry. The goal of 
the personalized medicine is to get the right dose of the 
right drug to the right patient at the right time. In this article, 
we  will  review  the  use  of  pharmacogenomics  in  drug 
discovery and development.

Keywords: targeted therapy, theragnostics

Introduction
Post-genomic biomarkers are now playing a critical role 
in making a prediction of transfer from preclinical to clinical 
development of drugs in terms of both safety and efficacy 
(Ozdemir  et  al.,  2007).  This  trend  is  revolutionizing 
diagnostics and drug development. For example, single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) screenings will help 
target discovery and drug development since pharmaceutical 
and biotech companies can exclude patients whose drug 
screenings show that a drug being tested would yield 
adverse  drug-related  serious  toxicities  and  ineffective 
efficacy to them.

Drug development currently takes too long and costs 
too much. The main reason that drug development is so 

*Corresponding author: E-mail Chul.W.Ahn@uth.tmc.edu
Tel +1-713-500-6701, Fax +1-713-500-6722
Accepted 27 May 2007

expensive is that it is so unproductive. DiMasi et al. (2003) 
estimated the average cost of bringing a new drug from the 
time of investment to marketing is $802 million in year 2000 
US dollars. Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers 
Association responded that the estimate of US$ 802 million 
was likely to be conservative (Frank, 2003). At the 2006 
Drug Discovery Technology conference, Steven Paul, 
executive vice president at Eli Lilly & Co., estimated that 
the cost of the new medical entity is currently $1.2 billion, 
and warned that the cost of producing a successful drug 
could reach $2 billion by 2010 unless the pharmaceutical 
industry can identify new and better ways to improve 
efficiency and effectiveness of drug discovery and clinical 
trials. Pharmaceutical companies can no longer afford to 
continue allocating the resources in cost-intensive later 
stages of clinical trials with drugs that are unlikely to have 
therapeutic effectiveness or are not better than the existing 
treatments.  That  is,  the  model  for  blockbuster  drug 
development with large-scale markets is increasingly less 
viable. Pharmaceutical companies should be more careful 
in the selection of drug candidates at an earlier stage so 
that  the  only  promising  drug  candidates  get  the  full 
development resources  (Kuhlmann, 2006).

Bringing  a  new  drug  to  the  market  currently  costs 
approximately $1.2 billion, which makes it economically 
impossible to target small patient populations. However, 
targeting  well-defined  small  patient  populations  will 
reduce the risk of failure and increase the likelihood of 
success of new drugs. Pharmacogenomics will allow us 
to identify genes with the highest likelihood of predicting 
efficacy for novel therapeutics and permit clinical trials to 
be substantially reduced in size. The ability to classify 
diseases into distinct molecular subcategories challenges 
traditional pharmaceutical business economic models of 
‘one-size- fits-all’ drugs, i.e., blockbuster drugs, by aiding 
in identifying patients for whom the drugs will be both safe 
and  effective.  Pharmacogenomics  could  enhance  the 
value of currently approved drugs with limited market 
share due to significant side effects or limited efficacy, Thus, 
the economic rationale for personalized medicine-driven 
healthcare decisions will be based increasingly on the cost 
savings realized through preventive interventions.

The blockbuster drugs that have been pursued by phar-
maceutical companies carry high risks and high costs. New 
tools and technologies such as pharmacogeno- mics can be 
used to improve the quality of decisions in target discovery 
and drug developments (Jain, 2006). Pharmacogenomics 

42 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 41-45, June 2007

promises to usher in an era of personalized medicine. The 
use of pharmacogenomics to identify biomarkers that have 
true predictive value would shorten development time and 
cost. Personalized medicine will help to achieve optimal med-
ical outcomes by helping patients and clinicians select the 
disease management approaches that are likely to work 
best in the context of a patient’s genetic and environmental 
profile.

The US Food and Drug Administration launched the 
Critical Path Initiative with the release of a report entitled 
“Innovation/Stagnation: Challenge and Opportunity on the 
Critical Path to New Medical Products” (http://www.fda.gov/oc/ 
initiatives/criticalpath/whitepaper.pdf). The report indicated 
concern on the rising difficulty and unpredictability of drug 
development and called for a concerted effort to modernize 
the scientific tools and exploit the potential of bioinformatics 
for the evaluation and prediction of safety, effectiveness, 
and manufacturability of candidate drugs. 

Projections on the future of pharmacogenomics are 
markedly  different  (Personalized  Medicine  Coalition, 
2006). For example, projections range from pessimistic 
opinions (Williams-Jones et al., 2003) to optimistic opinions 
(Ginsburg et al., 2006). In this article, we investigate the 
use of pharmacogenomics in drug development.

Pharmacogenomics
Highly  publicized  adverse  drug  reactions  and  drug 
withdrawals have drawn serious responses from FDA. The 
number  of  FDA-requested  alerts  to  potential  adverse 
reactions, called as ‘black box warning’ or ‘black label 
warning’, has recently increased dramatically. Lazarou et 
al. (1998) reported more than 2 million serious adverse 
drug reactions a year in the United States, causing as many 
as 137,000 deaths. A personalized medical approach of 
a patient with disease will mean that the genetic profile of 
the patient will improve the diagnosis of the underlying 
cause of the disease and allow the selection of a specific 
drug treatment, which yields fewer serious adverse drug 
reactions (Phillips et al., 2001). For example, Sconce et 
al. (2005) investigated the impact of genetic polymorphisms 
of two metabolizing enzymes, CYP2C9, and VKORC1, 
and  recommended  a  new  warfarin  dosing  regimens 
(Weinshilboum  et  al.,  2006).  FDA  advisory  committee 
recommended  genotyping  for  all  patients  receiving 
warfarin so that right warfarin dosing is given to the patient 
the first time to avoid adverse drug reactions (Womack, 
2005).

The FDA approved a molecular assay called ‘Invader 
UGT1A1’ for use in identifying patients that may be at 
increased risk of adverse reactions to the drug Irinotecan 
HCl used in the treatment of colorectal cancer. UGT1A1 

activity is reduced in individuals with polymorphisms of the 
UGT1A1*28 allele. In a prospective study of 66 patients 
treated with Irinotecan, patients with the 7/7 genotype 
(UGT1A1*28 homozygous) had a 9.3 times higher risk of 
grade 4 neutropenia toxicity than the patients with a 6/6 
or 6/7 genotype (Innocenti et al., 2004). The study of 
Innocenti et al. (2004) is the first prospective study with 
sufficient statistical power to show that patients with a 
UGT1A1*28 allele are at higher risk of grade 4 neutropenia.
Pharmacogenomics will help in aiding the right dose of 
the right drug to the right patients at the right time by 
predicting the probability of drug response based on the 
genetic makeup of patients (Mancinelli et al., 2000). About 
50% of all drugs are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 
family of enzymes present in the liver and gastrointestinal 
tract. Differences in the sequence of a gene can lead the 
individual to a slow metabolizer or quicker metabolizer for 
certain drugs. Someone with too slow metabolism has an 
increased risk to be “overdosed” when given a typical dose, 
possibly resulting in serious toxicity. The typical dose may 
be ineffective for someone with quick metabolism, and 
thus a higher dose may be needed.

The FDA approved the AmpliChip, which is the world's 
first pharmacogenetic microarray-based test approved for 
clinical  use.  The  AmpliChip  CYP450  Test  provides 
comprehensive  coverage  of  genetic  variations  for  the 
CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genes. These genes account for 
the metabolism of an estimated 25% of all prescription 
drugs. The AmpliChip will help physicians make better 
decisions about drug treatments and dosages. Physicians 
can order AmpliChip test to find out if the patient has 
mutations in a gene that is active in metabolizing many 
types of drugs, including beta-blockers, antidepressants, 
antipsychotics, and some chemotherapy drugs.

Pharmacogenomics  is  used  to  target  therapy  to  a 
subset of a disease. Genomic tests have enabled the 
identification of molecular targets specific to cancer cells, 
resulting  in  therapies  that  are  likely  to  respond  with 
enhanced therapeutic efficacy and less toxicity. Numerous 
cancer patients are benefiting from targeted drugs such 
as Erbitux (Cetuximab) for colorectal cancer patients with 
the presence of the biomarker EGFR, Herceptin (Trastuzmab) 
for  breast  cancer  patients  with  overexpression  of  the 
biomarker HER2 protein, Retinoid (Vesanoid) for acute 
promyelocytic patients with the presence of the biomarker 
PML/RAR gene, Gleevec (Imatinib) for chronic myeloid 
leukemia patients with the presence of the biomarker 
Philadelphia chromosome positive.

Theragnostics
There has been minimal collaboration between pharma-

ceutical companies and diagnostic companies due to vast 
differences in expectations regarding price, clinical trial in-
tegration of diagnostic device and therapeutic drugs and 
time to market. The collaborations have been employed 
only  in  circumstances  where  adverse  drug  reactions 
threaten the viability of drugs or therapeutic efficacies are 
limited to a relatively small subpopulation. Recently, ther-
agnostics,  a  term  coined  from  therapeutics  and  diag-
nostics, receives increasing attention as pharmacoge-
nomics moves to applications at point of patient care 
(Ozdemir et al., 2006). Theragnostics is a combination of 
diagnostics and therapeutics that tailors treatments for in-
dividual  patients  based  on  their  genetic  profiles. 
Theragnostics will identify the subpopulation in which the 
therapy will be effective, and/or will yield serious adverse 
drug reactions through the detection of biological markers. 
This will drastically change the conduct of clinical trials, 
which will be performed in well-defined subpopulations of 
patients. Theragnostics will provide more effective care to 
patients and the possibility of avoiding ineffective treat-
ments that might have serious side effects.

An example is the application of a new drug Herceptin 
(trastuzumab) for the treatment of patients with metastatic 
breast  cancer.  Herceptin  is  a  monoclonal  antibody 
directed at the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
(HER2). Patients that overexpress HER2 in their tumors 
can be effectively treated using this antibody, while breast 
cancer patients who do not overexpress HER2 will not 
benefit  from  this  medication.  Herceptin  is  the  first 
combination pharmacogenomics product.

Investigational  New  Drug  (IND)  application  for 
Herceptin was filed in 1991, and phase III clinical trial was 
completed in March 1997. Phase III clinical trial showed 

Pharmacogenomics in Drug Discovery and Development 43

that Herceptin was not effective in treating patients with 
metastatic  breast  cancer,  but  a  genetically  based 
post-evaluation of the patients showed significant efficacy 
in women with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
(HER2)-positive metastatic breast cancer. HER2-positive 
metastatic  breast  cancer  patients  are  estimated  to 
comprise  25-30  percent  of  all  breast  cancer  patients. 
These patients have a more aggressive disease, higher 
chance of recurrence, and poorer prognosis. Fast track 
designation  was  filed  in  March  1998  after  compelling 
genetic association was presented to FDA. In September, 
1998,  FDA  approval  was  made  for  combination  of  a 
diagnostic device and a therapeutic drug with HercepTest 
from  Dako  and  Herceptin  from  Genentech/  Roche. 
HercepTest is the first FDA-approved diagnostic system 
which  quickly  and  consistently  identifies  the  most 
appropriate  candidates  for  Herceptin  therapy.  In  the 
absence of selection, the overall response rate of breast 
cancer patients is approximately 10% However, overall 
response rate increases to 35-50% for patients selected 
on the basis of HER2 amplification. Therefore, HER2 
selection is critical for the use of Herceptin in the treatment 
of breast cancer patients. Testing for gene amplification or 
overexpression of HER2 is now well established, required 
by FDA, and offers theragnostic value for treatment of 
women with breast cancer with Herceptin.

Another example is the application of a new drug Iressa 
(Gefitinib) for the treatment of lung cancer patients. Iressa 
was originally approved for the treatment of advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Iressa was effective 
in  reducing  tumor  size  dramatically  only  in  a  small 
proportion of patients (Tamura et al., 2005). Large phase 
III clinical trials did not demonstrate the improvement in 

Table 1.  Combination of therapeutic drugs and diagnostic devices

Drug Name

Herceptin 
(Trastuzmab)

Test Name

HercepTest

Camptosar
(Irinotecan)

Erbitux
(Cetuximab)

Gleevec
(Imatinib)
Tarceva
(Erlotinib)
Purinethol
(mercatopurine)

UTG1A1

EGFR Pharma Dx kit

c-kit

EGFR pharma Dx kit

TPMT

Various drugs

AmpliChip CYP 450

Details

Immunohistochemical test is designed to identify metastatic breast cancer patients with overexpression 
of HER2 protein. HercepTest is used to select breast cancer patients who may benefit from treatment 
with Herceptin.
UTG1A1 Molecular Assay detects variations in a gene that affects how certain drugs are broken down 
and cleared by the body. UTG1A1 is used to select colon cancer patients who may benefit from treatment 
with Camptosar.

EGFR kit helps the detection of colorectal cancer patients who may benefit from the treatment with Erbitux, 
which is a monoclonal antibody that targets a protein called the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).

c-kit helps to detect the presence of the c-kit protein in gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). C-kit helps 
in detecting patients who may benefit from treatment with Gleevec.
EGFR kit helps the detection of non-small cell lung cancer patients who may benefit from the treatment 
with Tarceva, which is an EGFR inhibitor.
Patients with inherited little or no thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) activity are at increased risk 
for severe PURINETHOL toxicity from conventional doses of mercaptopurine and generally require 
substantial dose reduction.
AmpliChip test demonstrates if the patient has mutations in a gene that is active in metabolizing many 
types of drugs, including beta-blockers, antidepressants, antipsychotics, and some chemotherapy drugs.

44 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 41-45, June 2007

survival for a general population of lung cancer patients. 
FDA’s oncologic drugs advisory committee said that the 
confirmatory trial of AstraZeneca’s Iressa showed a lack 
of overall survival benefit in the NSCLC setting. ViroLogic 
Inc. had an agreement with AstraZeneca to conduct a 
biomarker study with application to Iressa, a selective 
epidermal growth factor receptor kinase inhibitor. ViroLogic 
tested tumor samples from lung cancer patients treated 
with  Iressa  to  evaluate  the  utility  of  these  assays  in 
targeting patients who would most likely get benefits from 
Iressa. Table 1 shows some of the products which use the 
combination of therapeutic drugs and diagnostic devices.

Targeted Therapy
Targeted therapy is ‘a type of medication which blocks the 
growth of cancer cells by interfering with specific targeted 
molecules needed for carcinogenesis and tumor growth, 
rather than by simply interfering with rapidly dividing cells’.  
The clinical development of traditional cytotoxic cancer 
agents is based on the assumption that the agents will 
reduce the size of tumors, and subsequently, the shrinkage 
of tumors will increase duration of the disease-free survival 
and overall survival of cancer patients. However, cytotoxic 
agents  may  lead  to  other  organ  damages,  and  may 
eventually lead to shorter overall survival of cancer patients 
since cytotoxic agents may kill normal cells in addition to 
cancer cells. In contrast, molecularly targeted agents are 
not designed to demonstrate tumor shrinkage but tumor 
growth inhibition. These agents may be more effective 
than cytotoxic agents since they will be less harmful to 
normal cells. Thus, these agents may provide clinical 
benefit such as longer survival and better quality of life.
Most molecularly targeted agents are less toxic than 
conventional  cytotoxic  agents.  Thus,  the  maximum 
therapeutic  effect  may  occur  at  doses  well  below  the 
maximum tolerated dose (MTD). The intensity of dose- 
effect curve for toxic effect may not predict the therapeutic 
effect. Since dose-escalation is usually guided by toxicity 
in traditional phase I clinical trials for cytotoxic agents, such 
designs may be inappropriate for optimizing the use of 
molecularly targeted drugs (Ahn and Kang, in press). For 
example, Avastin (bevacizumab), a monoclonal antibody 
to vascular endothelial growth factor, was approved for the 
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration. The MTD of Avastin is 20 mg/kg 
due to the toxicity of severe migraine headache in some 
patients (Cobleigh et al., 2003). In a randomized phase II 
trial of Avastin with chemotherapy, a 5 mg/kg dose yielded 
a higher response rate, longer median disease-free survival, 
and  longer  overall  survival  in  patients  with  metastatic 

colorectal carcinoma (Kabbinavar et al., 2003).

The emergence of a growing number of molecularly tar-
geted  therapies  challenges  the  traditional  clinical  trial 
paradigm in a variety of ways. There is an increasing need 
for novel statistical designs for clinical trials of molecularly 
targeted drugs since there is a growing need to determine 
a dose that yields optimal biological activity based on target 
inhibition or response rather than toxicity. The MTD of mo-
lecularly targeted drugs may be higher than the dose re-
quired achieving the maximum desired biological activity. 
Determination of the optimal biological dose (OBD) will 
provide more useful information for further drug develop-
ment of molecularly targeted drugs. The first-generation 
target- based anticancer drugs such as Gleevec, Herceptin, 
and Iressa, are now regarded as established drugs. 

Direction for Clinical Practice
Pharmacogenomics has the potential to revolutionize the 
way health care is provided. But, it is still in the stage of 
infancy.  There  are  many  challenging  issues  to  be 
overcome  to  implement  pharmacogenomics  vision  in 
clinical  practice  (Roden  et  al.,  2006).  (1)  Biological 
responses are complex since complex diseases are really 
complex. Disease and drug response can involve more 
than hundreds of genes. Environmental factors such as 
lifestyle,  nutrition  and  age  can  influence  disease  and 
efficacy of the drug. (2) Rapid and reliable automated 
methods must be developed to efficiently conduct whole 
genome sequencing to examine the influence of genes to 
the susceptibility to disease and individual drug response. 
(3) Accessibility of genetic information and databases is 
an  ethical  and  privacy  issue  since  identified  genetic 
susceptibility  to  disease  may  have  implications  for 
employers and insurance companies. (4) Cost for whole 
genome  sequencing,  SNP  analysis  and  expression 
profiling  are  still  expensive  even  though  the  cost  is 
plummeting. (5) Health care providers or pharmacists 
have to receive education about new diagnostic tests, and 
use  them  to  treat  and  advise  patients.  (6)  Insurance 
companies may not want pay for extra diagnostic tests. (7) 
The development of complex systems for computer-assisted 
prescription will be required to actually use the genomic 
data. (8) Management of the data for individual patients 
will be essential for personalized medical care (Ratain, 
2007). (9) The value of pharmacogenomic study may not 
be known until the study is completed. (10) Financial 
constraints still plays an important role in the development 
of drugs with uncertain outcomes.

Pharmacogenomics has the potentials to be used for 
the entire drug discovery and development. Eventually, 

pharmacogenomics test could be used at clinician’s office 
as a way to get the right dose of the right drug to the right 
patient at the right time. Rapid access of reliable whole 
genome sequencing results is essential for the clinicians 
to provide personalized medical care, particularly in the 
prescription of drugs.

Pharmacogenomics receives increasing attention and 
is becoming an integral part of drug discovery and develop-
ment although there are still many challenging issues to be 
overcome for the implementation of pharmacogenomics in 
clinical practice.  Potential solutions are evolving rapidly.  
Genotyping costs are plummeting. It is possible that the era 
of a thousand dollar for whole genome sequencing will be 
coming in the near future. The cost of a thousand dollars 
seems a trivial cost considering that the whole-genome se-
quencing data are useful for the whole life. With the develop-
ment of efficient data management system, management 
of the data for individual patients will be possible for person-
alized medical care. Pharmacogenomics is a young field 
that holds considerable promise for drug discovery and 
development.

References
Ahn, C. and Kang, S.H. Optimal biological dose for molecularly 
targeted therapies. Encyclopedia of Clinical Trials. In press.
Cobleigh, M., Langmuir, V., Sledge, G., et al. (2003). A phase 
I/II  dose-escalation  trial  of  bevacizumab  in  previously 
treated metastatic breast cancer. Seminar. Oncol. 30, 
117-124.

DiMasi, J.A., Hansen, R.W., and Grabowski, H.G. (2003). The 
price of innovation: new estimates of drug development 
costs. Journal of Health Economics 22, 151-185.

FDA. (2004). Innovation/Stagnation: Challenge and Opportunity 
on the Critical Path to New Medical Products. The Food 
and Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/oc/ initiatives/ 
criticalpath/whitepaper.pdf.

Frank,  R.G.  (2003).  Editorial:  New  estimates  of  drug 
development  costs.  Journal  of  Health  Economics  22, 
325-330.

Ginsburg, G.S. and Angrist, M. (2006). The future may be 
closer than you think: a response from the Personalized 
Medicine  Coalition  to  the  Royal  Society's  report  on 
personalized medicine. Personalized Med. 3, 119-123.
Innocenti, F., Undevia, S.D., and Iyer, L., et al. (2004). Genetic 
variants in the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 gene 
predict the risk of severe neutropenia of irinotecan. Journal 
of Clinical Oncology 22,1382-1388.

Jain, K.K. (2006). Challenges of drug discovery for personalized 
medicine. Current Opinion in Molecular Therapeutics 8, 
487-492.

Kabbinavar, F., Hurwitz, H.I., Fehrenbacher, L., et al. (2003). 

Pharmacogenomics in Drug Discovery and Development 45

Phase II randomized trial comparing bevacizumab plus 
fluorouracil  (FU)/leucovorin  (LV)  with  FU/LV  alone  in 
patients  with  metastatic  colorectal  cancer.  Journal  of 
Clinical Oncology 21, 60-65.

Kuhlmann, J. (2006). The applications of biomarkers in early 
clinical  drug  development  to  improve  decision-making 
processes. Appropriate Dose Selection: How to Optimize 
Clinical Drug Development. Venitz and Sittner (ed).pp. 
29-46.

Lazarou,  J.,  Pomeranz,  B.H.,  and  Corey,  P.N.  (1998). 
Incidence  of  adverse  drug  reactions  in  hospitalized 
patients. J. Amer. Med. Assn. 279, 1200-1205.

Mancinelli,  L.,  Cronin,  M.,  and  Sadée,  W.  (2000). 
Pharmacogenomics: The promise of personalized medicine. 
AAPS PharmSci. 2, 1-13.

Ozdemir, V., Williams-Jones, B., Cooper, D.M., Someya, T., 
and Godard, B. (2007). Mapping translational research in 
personalized  therapeutics:  from  molecular  markers  to 
health policy. Pharmacogenomics 8, 177-185.

Ozdemir, V., Williams-Jones, B., Glatt, S.J., Tsuang, M.T., 
Lohr, J.B., and Reist, C. (2006). Shifting emphasis from 
pharmacogenomics to theragnostics. Nature Biotechnology 
8, 942-946.

Personalized  Medicine  Coalition.  (2006).  The  case  for 

personalized medicine. New York, NY.

Phillips, K.A., Veenstra, D.L., Oren, E., Lee, K., and Sadée, 
W. (2001). The potential role of pharmacogenomics in 
reducing adverse drug reactions: A systematic review. J. 
Amer. Med. Assn. 286, 2270-2279.

Ratain, M.J. (2007). Personalized Medicine: Building the GPS 
to take us there. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics 81, 
321-322.

Roden, D,M., Altman, R,B., Benowitz, N.L., et al. (2006). 
Pharmacogenomics:  Challenges  and  opportunities. 
Annals of Internal Medicine 145, 749-757.

Sconce, E., Khan, T. Wynne, H., Avery, P. Monkhouse, L., 
King, B., Wood, P., Kesteven, P., Daly, A., and Kamali, F. 
(2005).The  impact  of  CYP2C9  and  VKORC1  genetic 
polymorphism and patient characteristics upon warfarin 
dose requirements: proposal for a new dosing regimen. 
Blood 106, 2329-2333.

Tamura, K. and Fukuoka, M. (2005). Gefitinib in non-small cell 

lung cancer. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 6, 985-993.

Weinshilboum, R.M. and Wang, L. (2006). Pharmacogenetics 
and  Pharmacogenomics:  Development,  Science,  and 
Translation. Annu. Rev. Genom. Human Genet. 7, 223-245.
Williams-Jones, B. and Corrigan, O.P. (2003). Rhetoric and 
hype: where’s the ‘ethics’ in pharmacogenomics? Am. J. 
Pharmacogenomics 3, 375-383.

Womack, C. (2005). As part of retrofitting, FDA panel votes 
to  relabel  warfarin  for  PGx;  Is  Dx  far  behind? 
Pharmacogenomics Reporter, December.

