Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  2(3)  131-133, September 2004 

MediScore: MEDLINE-based Interactive Scoring of Gene 
and Disease Associations 

Hye-Young Cho, Bermseok Oh, Jong-Keuk Lee, 
Kuchan Kimm and lnSong Koh* 

Division  of  Epidemiology  and  Bioinformatics,  National 
Genome  Research  Institute,  National  Institute  of  Health,  5 
Nokbun-Dong,  Eunpyung-Gu,  Seoul  122-701,  Korea 

Abstract 
MediScore  is  an  information  retrieval  system,  which 
helps to  search  for the  set  of  genes  associated  with  a 
specific disease or the set of diseases associated with a 
specific  gene.  Despite  recent  improvement  of  natural 
language  processing  (NLP)  and  other  text  mining 
approaches  to  search  for  disease  associated  genes, 
many false positive results come out due to diversity of 
exceptional cases as well as ambiguities in gene names. 
In  order  to  overcome  the  weak  points  of  current  text 
mining  approaches,  MediScore  introduces  statistical 
normalization  based  on  binomial  to  normal  distribution 
approximation which corrects inaccurate scores caused 
by  common  words  not 
representing  genes  and 
interactive  rescoring  by  the  user  to  remove  the  false 
positive results.  Interactive rescoring includes individual 
alias  scoring  for  each  gene  to  remove  false  gene 
synonyms,  referring  MEDLINE  abstracts,  and  cross 
referencing between OMIM and other related information. 

Availability : Mediscore  is freely  available  from  http://www. 
ngri.re.kr/mediscore. 
Supplementary lnfonnation : http://www. ngri. re.kr/mediscore/ 
manual 

Keywords: interactive scoring, MEDLINE, text mining 

Introduction 
Research in biomedical science in the past decades has 
generated  a  large  volume  of  data stored  in  databases 
such  as  MEDLINE,  mentioning 
relationships 
between genes and diseases. When someone wants to 
study genes related with a specific disease, there are two 
popular ways one may take. One is to search the related 

the 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail insong@ngri.re.kr, 
Tel +82-2-380-1416, Fax +82-2-354-1063 
Accepted  15 August 2004 

literatures manually through MEDLINE keyword search. 
The  huge  amounts  of  literatures,  however,  make  it 
impractical for one to find out the literatures of interest in 
this  way.  Another  is  to  hunt  up  the  list  of  genes  from 
various disease-related databases for a specific disease, 
but the availability of data in these databases is limited. 
More improved way is to list up the relative associations 
based on biomedical literatures using some computational 
tools,  which  crudely  mimic  manual  search.  Currently 
there seems to be two directions for this approach.  First 
is  to  use  so  called  natural  language  processing  (NLP) 
which  intends  to  extract  meanings  from  sentence 
structures.  Due to  huge diversity of exceptions and the 
structural  ambiguities  of  biomedical 
literature  text, 
however,  NLP still  has  a certain  limitation  and  has  not 
been used practically yet (Friedman eta/., 2001 ). Second 
is  to  apply text  mining  and  various  algorithms to  score 
frequency  of  gene  and  disease  co-occurrence  in  the 
literature database (Marcotte eta/., 2001; Chaussabel and 
Sher,  2002;  Perez-lratxeta  eta/.,  2002;  Hu  eta/.,  2003). 
This method is helpful, but still produces significant number 
of false positives due to ambiguities of gene symbols. 

In  this  note,  we  present  a  complementary  way  of 
correcting the text mining results to reduce false prediction 
rates.  We  developed  an  information  retrieval  system, 
MediScore (MEDLINE-based Interactive Scoling of gene 
and  disease  associations),  which  lists  up  the  possible 
sets of genes associated with a user-selected disease or 
sets  of diseases associated with  a user- selected gene 
with much more improved accuracy. 

Methods 
MediScore  was  implemented  as 
follows:  First,  we 
indexed all  aliases of genes and those of diseases. And 
then their results were formatted as a relational database. 
We counted the number of co-occurrence of each gene 
against  all  diseases.  Finally  we  applied  a  statistical 
normalization to the counts of co-occurrences in order to 
get the normalized association scores. 

MediScore Database 
Each gene description, i.e.  official/preferred symbol and 
its full description came from the Locuslink. The list of 60 
disease  terms  were  selected  from  MeSHs  (Medical 

132  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  2(3) 131-133, September 2004 

~~ 1 'st scoring result 
Web  Interface -
-

Statistical 

Nonnalization 

gl!ne  & disease 

associtaion matrix 

Fig. 1. The system flow of MediScore 

Subject Headings) based on the priorities of our research 
interests and limitation of available hardware capability. 
All  the information above was formatted  as a relational 
database, and the OMIM,  PubMed and some additional 
public gene information were referenced as hyperlinks. 

Text Mining Algorithms 
First, we indexed all occurrences of a set of synonyms for 
all genes from MEDLINE abstracts. We made each alias 
of a gene to have a number of PubMed  IDs. Therefore, 
when a certain gene is selected, all of its aliases and their 
PubMed  IDs are also integrated.  In this manner, all  the 
related  PubMed  IDs are  indexed for a certain  gene.  In 
case of disease term, after being indexed all disease terms 
individually,  including  MeSH,  they  are  also  integrated. 
These results are constructed as matrices of the gene and 
disease  associations  per  each  decade.  This  approach 
assumes  that  most  co-citations  describe  a  positive 
association (Hu eta/., 2003). And then all the scores are 
normalized by the statistical manner as described below. 

Statistical Basis 
Let NA be the total number of MEDLINE abstracts and NG 
be  the  number of abstracts  mentioning a specific gene 
one  or  more  times,  No  be  the  number  of  those 
mentioning a specific disease likewise, and Ns=NG&o be 
the  number  of  abstracts  in  which  gene  and  disease 
names co-occur.  Then the probability of co-occurrence 
of a specific disease and a gene in one abstract PG&o is 

Pc&D=  N s 
NA 

distribution  denoted  by  Bin(n,p)  is  specified  by  the 
number  of  observations  n  and 
the  probability  of 
occurrence p.  The expected value and variance for the 
binomial distribution Bin(n,p)are E(x)=11pand  Var(x)=11p(t-p). 
Since  the  binomial  distribution  approximates  normal 
distribution for large enough n (Central  Limit Theorem), 
the  mean  and  variance  of  the  Bin(n,p)  can  be 
approximated  as  JL=np  and  C5
2=np(1-p).  As  we  are 
interested  in  highly  non-random  events,  we  apply 
standardization  of  normal  distribution,  and  then  list the 
high Z score cases meaning non-random events. 

Z=  X-fl. 

(J 

- N(O,J). 

In  order to get the  normalized association score A, the 
expected  value  E(X)  which  represents  the  portion  of 
random  co-occurrences  in  the  total  number  of  co(cid:173)
occurrences Ns,  is subtracted from Ns and then its result 
is to be divided by the standard deviation sd(X). Applying 
these, we get the normalized association score A. 

A= X -E(X) 

sd(X) 

N s - np  _ 
~np(l- p)- ~Ns · Pc&o(l- Pc&o). 

N s - N s · Pc&o 

The  larger  value  of  A  means  the  less  random  co(cid:173)
occurrence,  thus  indicating  strong  association  of  gene 
and  disease.  Through  this statistical  normalization,  we 
could  filter  out  random  co-occurrences  with  a  non(cid:173)
specific high Ns score caused by the general words used 
for  gene  symbols  such  as  MASS(2200),  CELL(1057), 
UP(7378), MICE(4280),  IMAGE(64589) and FAT(2195) 
- Locuslink ID in parentheses. 

Since the event of co-occurrence only belongs to one of 
the two cases, happened or not happened, its probability 
distribution  takes  binomial  distribution.  The  binomial 

Interactive Re-scoring 
After a  user gets the  list  of candidate  genes  and  their 

MEDLINE-based Interactive Scoring of Associations  133 

Mec:liScOre Medllne>-OOsed  Interactive scoring of the R¢1ationsh1ps  oetween  9enes and ctrsea~s 

~ by~  $k;um 

Mi'itwJWI! 

CUI'~ 

K~OWN INFORMATION 

Description 

PubMerl 

TP 

Symbol 

19HI's 

1980's 

1990's 

lOOO's 

[colony 

Fig. 2.  Snapshots of MediScore on web interface. 

scores  that  the  MediScore  system  has  recommended, 
the user does the interactive re-scoring.  In this step the 
user verifies whether the level of associations or ranks of 
the  candidate  genes  are  true  or false  with  the  help  of 
various information offered by the system. First, the user 
may recheck original gene meanings represented not by 
gene symbols but by full  descriptions of genes. In many 
cases this simple procedure is enough to filter out some 
false  positives.  Second,  the  user  may  remove  false 
positive results through individual alias scoring for each 
gene  to  remove  false  gene  synonyms.  For  example, 
gene  symbol  ER  stands  for  two  different  genes  i.e. 
estrogen receptor and epiregulin. This kind of gene symbol 
confusion  may  be  rechecked  by  scoring  with  individual 
gene symbol. Abrupt change in association score helps the 
user  to  determine  true  or  false  gene  symbols.  Third, 
MediScore also suggests definition of a disease associated 
with a gene based on the OMIM database. Additionally, the 
user may actually take a look at some MEDLINE abstracts 
to check real usage of gene synonyms in the context, which 
is  also  supported  by  the  system  through  hyperlinks. 
Through this series of verification procedures, the user may 
eventually get a highly accurate list of genes  associated 
with a specific disease. 

Acknowledgement 

This work was supported  in  part  by Health  Foundation, 

Korea  and  in  part  by  the  intramural  fund  of  National 
Institute of Health, Korea. 

References 
Chaussabel,  D.  and  Sher  A.  (2002).  Mining  microarray 
expression  data  by  literature  profiling.  Genome  Bioi. 
3( 1 0): RESEARCH0055. 

Friedman,  C.,  Kra,  P.,  Yu,  H.,  Krauthammer,  M.,  and 
Rzhetscky,  A.  (2001).  GENIES:  a  natural-language 
processing  system  for  the  extraction  of  molecular 
pathways from journal articles. Bioinformatics 17, Suppl. 
1, 874-882. 

Hu,  Y.,  Hines,  L.M.,  Weng,  H.,  Zuo,  D.,  Rivera,  M., 
Richardson,  A.,  and  LaBaer,  J.  (2003}.  Analysis  of 
genomic and  proteomic data using  advanced  literature 
mining.  J.  Proteome Res.  2(4), 405-412. 

Marcotte, E.M., Xenarios,  \.,and Eisenberg, D. (2001). Mining 
literature for protein-protein  interactions.  Bioinformatics 
17(4), 359-63. 

Perez-lratxeta,  C.,  Bork,  P.,  and  Andrade  M.A.  (2002). 
Association  of  genes  to  genetically  inherited  diseases 
using data mining.  Nature Genetics. 31,  316-319. 

