Application  Notes 

Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  2(2)  107-109, June 2004 

HapAnalyzer: Minimum Haplotype Analysis System  for 
Association Studies 

Ho-Youl  Jungt,  Jung--Sun  Parkt,  Yun-Ju  Park, 
Young--Jin Kim,  Kuchan Kimm and lnSong Koh* 

Division  of  Epidemiology  and  Bioinformatics,  National 
Genome  Research  Institute,  National  Institute  of Health,  5 
Nokbun- dong,  Eunpyeng-gu,  Seoul,  122-701,  Korea 

Abstract 
Summary:  HapAnalyzer  is  an  analysis  system  that 
provides minimum analysis methods for the SNP-based 
association  studies. 
It  consists  of  Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium  (HWE)  test, 
linkage  disequilibrium  (LD) 
computation,  haplotype  reconstruction,  and  SNP  (or 
haplotype )-phenotype association assessment. It is well 
suited  to  a  case-control  association  study  for  the 
unrelated population. 
Availability:  The  HapAnalyzer  is  freely  available  from 
http://www.ngri.re.kr/HapAna/yzer/ 
Contact:  insong@nih.go.kr 

Keywords:  SNP,  haplotype, haplotype block, disease 
association 

In recent years, the SNP-based association studies give 
the clues which may allow us to unravel complex genetic 
traits.  Because  of 
the  high-throughput  genotyping 
technologies,  it is strongly required  to  devise a software 
system  to  effectively  analyze  the  association  between 
genotypes  and  phenotypes.  The  desired  system  should 
include the following  minimum analysis components- the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (1-M/E) test, linkage disequilibrium 
(LD) test,  in-silica  haplotype  reconstruction  module,  and 
SNP  (or  haplotype)-phenotype  association  module.  At 
present,  however,  there  is  no  such  integrated  system 
which  provides  all  these  minimum  analysis  methods. 
There  is  only  a  system  which  provides  partial  analysis 
methods  HWE test, LD computation, and SNP-phenotype 
association (Barrett, 2003). 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail insong@nih.go.kr, 
Tel +82-2-380-1416,  Fax +82-2-354-1068 
Accepted  1 0 May 2004 
tThese authors contributed equally to this work. 

When we do the analysis ofthe SNP-based association 
studies,  we  generally  use  the  several  software  systems 
separately for each specific purpose, e.g. the SAS or other 
statistical  packages  for  HWE  test  and  analysis  of  the 
phenotype association, the GOLD (Abecasis and Cookson, 
2000) for LD visualization, and the PL-EM (Qin eta/., 2002) 
or other software systems for haplotype reconstruction. 

In this manner, it is very tedious to use various software 
packages for each step of analysis. Additionally, we have 
to convert the input file format in order to use any specific 
software or analysis tools,  and/or have to  run  the whole 
software packages although we only need to use the small 
fraction  of their functions.  HapAnalyzer is  an  integrated 
system  for  the  SNP-based  association  studies,  and  it 
effectively includes all the above mentioned components. 
Fig.  1 shows the system flow of HapAnalyzer.  First,  a 
genotype  file  with  the  tab-delimitated  format  (you  can 
easily find  a  sample file  in  our system)  is  loaded.  If the 
analysis of phenotype-association is needed, a file which 
defines the sample's phenotype (case or control) must be 
loaded  with  the  appropriate  genotype  file.  We  support 
importing the linkage format file.  If the genotypes contain 
any missing data, the SNP loci or sample's genotype must 
be  filtered  out  or  predicted  by  the  missing  imputation 
module for further analysis.  Second,  users  can  take the 
test of the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Third,  in  order to 
identify  LD  blocks  HapAnalyzer provides  the  algorithm 
which was proposed by Gabriel eta/ (Gabriel eta/., 2002). 
The  confidential  interval  and  block threshold  are  easily 
adjusted by the user interface. Fourth, users can make the 
individual's  haplotype  from  their  genotypes  using  the 
PL-EM  (it  must be  installed  in  the  HapAna/yzer working 
directory).  Furthermore  we  provide  the  tagging  SNP 
information  after  the  haplotype  reconstruction.  Finally, 
users  can  make  the  assessment  of  the  SNP  (or 
haplotype)-phenotype association by logistic regression. 

HapAna/yzer consists of five subparts - HWE test,  LD 
block computation, haplotype reconstruction, SNP-phenotype 
association, and haplotype-phenotype association. 

Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium test 

HWE test is to tell whether the population is in equilibrium 
according to the Hardy-Weinberg law.  If the population is 
in  equilibrium,  the  genotype  frequency  is  the  same  in 
parents and  progeny.  Our system provides the observed 

108  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  2(2) 107-109, June 2004 

I Genotypes~ 

HWE test 

Fig.  1. The system flow of HapAnalyzer. 

Haplotype 

Reconstruction 

Phenotype 

Association 

Compute 
tagSNPs 

Reporting 

genotypic frequencies, the allelic frequencies, the expected 
genotypic frequencies,  the Chi-square test value,  and  its 
p-value  for  each  SNP  locus.  Users  can  define  the 
cut-threshold for HWE,  which  is generally set to 0.01  or 
0.05. 

Linkage Disequilibrium & block computation 

For two loci A and B,  LD is said to exist when alleles at A 
and  B  tend  to  co-occur  on  haplotypes  in  proportions 
different 
than  would  be  expected  under  statistical 
independence. There are many LD measures, e.g. 0, 0', 

101. r,  and  so on  (Devlin  and  Risch,  1995).  Our system 
provides  two  measures,  101  and  r with  confidential 

interval  and  p-value,  and  shows  the  LD  blocks  by 
computing the  confidential  interval  between  every set of 
pairwise  SNP  loci  (Gabriel  et at.,  2002).  We  applied  a 
dynamic programming algorithm to computing candidate 
LD blocks as follows: 

programming  algorithm  of computing  haplotype  blocks 
based-on  haplotype  diversity  (Zhang  et  a/.,  2002). 
Linkage  disequilibrium  values  between  every  set  of 
pairwise  SNP  loci  are also visualized  by  its  equivalent 
image  format  as  GOLD,  and  provided  by  a  Microsoft 
Excel spread sheet and a text file format. 

Haplotype reconstruction 

reconstruction  module  determines 

Haplotype 
the 
individual's haplotypes given the genotypes by using an 
in-silico haplotyping method. There are so many publicly 
available methods. Our system includes the PL-EM and 
also  provides  our  novel  method,  iHaplor (Jung  eta/., 
2003), modified Clark's method (Clark, 1990). Users can 
alternatively  select  the  reconstruction  method.  The 
system  also  gives  the  information  of the  tagging  SNP 
after  the  haplotype  reconstruction  using  the  BEST 
algorithm (Sebastiani eta/., 2003). 

C; = min{Ci-1 + block(r;, IJ),  if 1 ~i~J}, 

SNP-phenotype association 

where block(ri, IJ)  is 1 if the region between SNP 
site  ri and  rj over which more than 95% of SNP pairs 
show high levels of LD else it is a positive infinite value. 
High  level  of LD  is  determined  by user defined values, 
however  conventionally  LD  of  which  lower  bound  of 
confidential interval is over 0.7 and upper bound is over 
0.98  is  regarded  as  a  high  level  of LD  (Gabriel  eta/., 
2002). 

In our system, we additionally provide another dynamic 

By assessing  the  SNP-phenotype  association,  we  can 
identify the  candidate  disease-causing  SNP  locus.  We 
provide  the  major  (A)  vs.  minor  (a)  allelic  difference 
between case and  control  population.  We also give the 
genotypic  difference  between 
these  populations 
according  to  three  genetic models  - dominant  (AA+Aa 
vs.  aa),  recessive  (AA  vs.  Aa+aa),  and  co-dominant 
model (AA vs. Aa vs.  aa).  In each analysis, we compute 
the odds ratio,  Chi-square test value, and its p-value by 
logistic regression. 

Minimum Haplotype Analysis System for Association Studies  1 09 

Fig. 2. A snapshot of HapAna/yzer: it is run on all  platforms on which the Java Running Environment (JRE 1.4) is installed. 

Haplotype-phenotype association 

After the  haplotype  reconstruction,  we  can  assess  the 
association  of the  haplotypes with  phenotype  between 
case and control population.  Our system only gives the 
result  of  assessment  of  the  association  of  common 
haplotypes whose frequencies are larger than 0.05. We 
consider a  haplotype (H) as if it is an allele. Our system 
provides the allelic difference between case and control 
(H vs. -,·-·means that the sample who does not contain 
the haplotype  H).  Our system  also gives the genotypic 
difference between these population according to three 
genetic models- dominant (HH+H- vs. --),  recessive (HH 
vs. H-+--),  and co-dominant model (HH vs.  H- vs.  --). 

Fig. 2 shows a snapshot of our system. HapAnalyzer 
is implemented  using the  Java  1.4,  and  it is  run  on  all 
platforms on which the Java Running Environment (JRE 
1.4)  is  installed.  We  have  tested  our  system  on  both 
WindowsXP and Linux machines with the 512MB  main 
memory and Pentium-4 2.0 GHz CPU. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported  by the intramural fund  of the 
National Institute of Health,  Korea. 

References 

Abecasis, G. R  and Cookson, W  0. C. (2000). GOLD-Graphical 

Overview of Linkage  Disequilibrium.  Bioinformatics  16, 
182-183. 

Clark,  A.  G.  (1990).  Inference  of  haplotypes  from  PeR(cid:173)

amplified  samples  of  diploid  populations.  Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 7,  111-122. 

Devlin,  B.  and  Risch,  N.  (1995).  A Comparison of Linkage 
for  Fine-Scale  Mapping. 

Disequilibrium  Measures 
Genomics 29,  311-322. 

Gabriel,  S.  B.  et  a/.  (2002).  The  Structure  of  Haplotype 
Blocks in the Human Genome. Science 296, 2225-2229. 
Jung,  H-.Y.  et  a/.  (2003).  iHaplor:  A  Hybrid  Method  for 
Haplotype Reconstruction, In Proceedings of the Second 
Annual Conference of the Korean Society for Bioinformatics 
(KSBI2003),  2,  221-228. 

Barrett,  J.  (2003).  HaploView.  http://www.broad.mit.edu/ 

personalljcbarretlhaplo/ index.php. 

Qin, z.  S.,  Niu,  T.,  and Liu,  J.  S.  (2002).  Partition-Ligation(cid:173)
Expectation-Maximization Algorithm for Haplotype Inference 
with Single- Nucleotide Polymorph isms. American Journal 
of Human Genetics 71,  1242-1247. 

Sebastiani, P., Lazarus, R., Weiss, S. T., Kunkel, L. M., Kahane, 
1.  S.,  and  Ramoni,  M.  F ..  (2003).  Minimal  haplotype 
tagging.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Science,  100, 9900-9905. 

(2002).  A  dynamic  programming  algorithm 

Zhang,  K.,  Deng,  M.,  Chen, T.,  Waterman,  M.S., and Sun, 
for 
F. 
haplotype block partitioning.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
99, 7335-7339. 

