RAPID COMMUNICATION

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  87-90,  June  2008

An  Optimized  Strategy  for  Genome  Assembly  of 
Sanger/pyrosequencing  Hybrid  Data  using  Available  Software

Haeyoung  Jeong1  and  Jihyun  F.  Kim1,2*

1Laboratory  of  Microbial  Genomics,  Systems  Microbiol-
ogy  Research  Center,  Korea  Research 
Institute  of 
Bioscience  and  Biotechnology  (KRIBB)  and  2Field  of 
Functional  Genomics,  School  of  Science,  Korea 
University  of  Science  and  Technology  (UST),  Daejeon 
305-806,  Korea

Abstract

During  the  last  four  years,  the  pyrosequencing-based 
454  platform  has  rapidly  displaced  the  traditional  Sanger 
sequencing  method  due  to  its  high  throughput  and  cost 
effectiveness.  Meanwhile,  the  Sanger  sequencing  meth-
odology  still  provides  the  longest  reads,  and  paired-end 
sequencing  that  is  based  on  that  chemistry  offers  an 
opportunity  to  ensure  accurate  assembly  results.  In  this 
report,  we  describe  an  optimized  approach  for  hybrid de 
novo  genome  assembly  using  pyrosequencing  data  and 
varying  amounts  of  Sanger-type  reads.  454  platform- 
derived  contigs  can  be  used  as  single  non-breakable 
virtual  reads  or  converted  to  simpler  contigs  that  consist 
of  editable,  overlapping  pseudoreads.  These  modified 
contigs  maintain  their  integrity  at  the  first  jumpstarting 
assembly  stage  and  are  edited  by  fragmenting  and 
rejoining.  Pre-existing  assembly  software  then  can  be 
applied  for  mixed  assembly  with  454-derived  data  and 
Sanger  reads.  An  effective  method  for  identifying  ge-
nomic  differences  between  reference  and  sample  se-
quences  in  whole-genome  resequencing  procedures  al-
so  is  suggested.

Abbreviations: CelAsm  (Celera  Assembler)

Keywords: hybrid  assembly,  pyrosequencing,  resequen-
cing

The  454  sequencing  platform  (Roche  Applied  Science 
GS  20  or  GS  FLX),  which  is  based  on  massively  parallel 
sequence  determination  by  pyrosequencing  on  clonally 
amplified  genome  fragments  that  are  captured  on  micro-
scopic  beads,  is  becoming  more  and  more  popular  in 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  jfk@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-860-4412,  Fax  +82-42-879-8595
Accepted  14  June  2008

genome  sequencing  applications  (Margulies et al.,  2005). 
Its  characteristics,  which  are  superior  to  the  traditional 
Sanger  method  -  such  as  high  production  rate  with  an 
affordable  cost,  absence  of  cloning  bias,  and  ability  to 
go  beyond  strong  secondary  structure  -  enlarge  its  field 
of  application  in  genome  technology.  Although  there  are 
several  commercial  next-generation  sequencing  tech-
nologies  that  have  become  available  in  recent  years 
(Shendure et al.,  2004),  454  pyrosequencing  is  the  only 
one  that  can  be  used  for de novo  genome  sequencing 
among  the  high-throughput,  short-read  sequencing  tech-
nologies  due  to  its  long  read  length  (∼250  bp  in  GS 
FLX;  announced  to  be  extended  to  400  bp  by  the  end 
of  2008).
    Many  sequencing  centers,  however,  may  want  to  mix 
a  limited  amount  of  traditional  Sanger-type  sequences, 
usually  generated  from  fosmid  libraries,  for  scaffolding 
purposes.  Also,  a  few  may  want  to  mix  a  considerable 
amount  of  Sanger  read  data  to  454  pyrosequencing  da-
ta  to  produce  more  accurate  results.  Among  the  SFF 
tools  that  Roche  Applied  Science  provides  for  the  han-
dling  of  raw  data  files,  SFFINFO  can  generate  FASTA 
and  quality  score  files  from  an  SFF  file.  Although  the 
converted  files  can  be  assembled  using  PHRAP  (http:// 
www.phrap.org/),  it  does  not  ensure  correct  assembly 
because  the  quality  scores  that  are  generated  from  454 
data  are  not  compatible  with  those  from  Sanger  reads. 
Further,  PHRAP  has  problems  with  handling  massive 
reads  (usually  hundreds  of  thousands  from  an  SFF  file). 
A  recent  report  has  demonstrated  that  GS  assembler 
programs  (gsAssembler  for  de  novo  assembly  and 
gsMapping  for  reference-guided  assembly;  http://www. 
454.com/enabling-technology/the-software.asp)  that  are 
supplied  by  Roche  Applied  Science  are  ideal  for  correct 
assembly  of  454  data  that  are  short  and  inherently  er-
ror-rich  (Chaisson  and  Pevzner,  2008).
    Recent  versions  (1.1.02.15  and  later)  of  GS  assembler 
programs  support  mixed  assembly  with  Sanger-type 
reads,  but  their  performance  is  not  well  known  at 
present.  Moreover,  because  pre-existing  assembly  soft-
ware  such  as  PHRAP  and  CelAsm  (Huson et al.,  2001) 
do  not  directly  support  data  that  are  produced  by  454 
machines,  454-derived  contigs  (GS  contigs)  should  be 
used  as  if  they  were  individual  reads  or  be  shredded  to 
generate  many  overlapping  'pseudoreads'  (Goldberg  et 
al.,  2006).  Pseudoreads,  made  from  GS  contigs  to  emu-
late  the  read  size  of  standard  Sanger  data  (ca.  600  bp), 
are  virtual  reads  whose  stepping  between  consecutive 

88    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  87-90,  June  2008

shreds  are  controlled  such  that  the  underlying  GS  read 
depth  can  be  represented.  For  example,  an  890-bp  con-
tig  that  has  an  average  depth  of  21.7  can  be  converted 
into  32  600-bp  pseudoreads.  The  stepping  between 
consecutive  pseudoreads  can  be  given  by  (contig_length 
-  pseuoread_length)/(num_pseudoreads  -  1),  or  9.35  bp. 
It  not  only  reduces  the  effective  data  size  but  also  mini-
mizes  misassemblies  by  co-incorporating  Sanger  data  at 
the  read  level.
    In  this  communication,  we  introduce  a  general  strat-
egy  for  genome  assembly,  either de novo  sequencing  or 
resequencing,  that  uses  both  454  pyrosequence  data 
and  Sanger  reads.  The  key  consideration  is  that  GS 
contigs  are  processed  as  if  they  were  normal  'reads'.

De  novo  Sequencing

A  general  decision  tree  for de novo  genome  sequencing 
is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  454  pyrosequencing  at  20X  se-
quence  coverage  is  usually  enough  to  produce  a 
high-quality  draft.  For  a  conventional  microbial  genome 
project  that  employs  paired-end  Sanger  sequencing  on 
genomic  libraries,  end  sequences  from  a  fosmid  library 
that  has  10X  clone  coverage  is  sufficient  for  generating 
scaffolds.  This  also  would  be  an  appropriate  choice 
when  both  454  pyrosequencing  and  fosmid  end  se-
quencing  with  Sanger  chemistry  are  utilized.
    For  completion  of  a  genome  sequencing  project, 
CONSED  with  primer  design,  contig/read  editing,  scaf-
fold  viewing,  and  other  plentiful  features  (http://www. 
phrap.org/)  is  the  most  preferred  software.  Though  an 

ACE  file  that  has  a  complete  folder  structure  readable 
by  CONSED  can  be  produced  by  GS  assembler  pro-
grams,  it  is  not  fully  compatible.  Specifically,  one  read 
can  appear  in  multiple  contigs  if  it  spans  the  boundary 
between  two  contigs,  of  which  only  one  corresponds  to 
a  repeat  region.  After  assembly,  the  names  of  many 
reads  often  are  converted  into  non-standard  ones  to  re-
flect  the  position  of  an  aligned  region  as  well,  which 
may  hamper  the  proper  understanding  of  read  informa-
tion  by  CONSED,  such  as  for  the  assembly  view 
feature.  We  therefore  highly  recommend  using  PHRAP 
or  other  assembler  software  that  generates  100% 
CONSED-compatible  ACE  files  if  users  are  going  to  fin-
ish  the  genome  project.
    If  finishing  is  not  scheduled  (right  side  of  the  first  de-
cision  step  in  Fig.  1),  mixed  assembly  using  gsAssem-
bler  would  be  the  most  convenient  solution.  Because 
there  are  upper  limits  for  the  number  of  Sanger  reads 
that  can  be  incorporated  depending  on  system  memory 
and  the  amount  of  data,  GS  contigs  (with  quality  scores) 
can  be  converted  to  virtual  reads  and  then  assembled 
with  Sanger  reads  using  PHRAP.  If  there  are  reads  that 
are  larger  than  65,536  bp,  PHRAP.LONGREADS  should 
be  used.  MKTRACE  in  the  CONSED  package  is  a  con-
venient  tool  for  producing  fake  traces  and  PHD  files 
with  nucleotide  FASTA  files  and  quality  score  files  as 
input.
    In  case  of  scaffolding  with  just  a  small  amount  of 
Sanger  reads,  reads  can  be  incorporated  directly  in 
CONSED.  For  this  application,  individual  ACE  files  are 
produced  from  each  GS  contig  after  conversion  to  vir-

Fig.  1.  Decision  tree  for  a  ge-
nome  project  that  employs  both 
454  pyrosequencing  and  Sanger 
sequencing.  The  first  choice  de-
pends  on  whether  finishing  will  be 
carried  out  or  not,  because 
CONSED-compatible  ACE  output 
from  the  assembler  software  is 
crucial  for  finishing.  The  amount  of 
Sanger  data 
then  determines 
whether  pseudoread  generation 
and  mixed  assembly  will  be  used 
or  not  (1  or  2).  If  finishing  is  not 
scheduled,  mixed  assembly  using 
gsAssembler 
the  most  con-
venient  way,  whereby  a  small 
amount  of  Sanger  data  is  just 
enough  for  scaffolding  purposes 
(3).

is 

tual  reads  (via  PHD  files)  and  are  merged  into  a  single 
ACE  file.  Sanger  reads  can  then  be  incorporated  into 
the  contigs  by  'Add  New  Reads'  in  CONSED.  Because 
this  menu  does  not  automatically  extend  or  join  contigs 
(it  only  compares  newly  added  reads  with  existing  con-
tigs),  users  must  validate  the  results  of  the  additive  as-
sembly  and  process  them  manually.
    Converting  a  GS  contig  into  a  single  virtual  read  great-
ly  reduces  data  size,  which  facilitates  ACE  file  manipu-
lation  by  CONSED.  This  simplification  process  also 
means  loss  of  assembly  information.  Misjoining  of  two 
repeat  sequences,  frequently  reported  from  454  py-
rosequencing-driven  genome  assembly,  would  be  mini-
mized  if  mixed  assembly  is  carried  out  entirely  by 
gsAssembler.  A  GS  contig  that  is  processed  as  a  read 
in  our  suggested  strategy  is  literally  a  minimal  unit  and 
cannot  be  torn  apart  and  rejoined;  editing  only  at  the 
nucleotide  level  is  allowed.  Therefore,  a  trick  is  required 
to  break  or  rejoin  the  virtual  reads.  From  each  GS  con-
tig,  a  simplified  contig  (GSf  contig;  'f'  stands  for  'frag-
mentable')  that  consists  of  overlapping  pseudoreads 
with  an  appropriate  offset  can  be  produced  (Fig.  2). 
These  pseudoreads  will  be  used  only  in  the  context  of 
assembly  in  TIGR  Assembler's  CONTIG  file  format.  TIGR 
Assembler  is  the  only  software  that  makes  jumpstart  as-

Fig.  2.  Schematic  drawing  of  GS  contig  processing  and 
assembly.  A,  the  simplest  approach,  in  which  each  GS 
contig  is  converted  into  a  virtual  read  that  can  be  edited 
only  at  the  nucleotide  level.  B,  GS  contigs  are  converted 
into  simpler  contigs  that  consist  of  several  overlapping
pseudoreads.  By  means  of  jumpstarting  the  assembly,  they 
can  maintain  their  integrity  as  contigs  during  the  first  hybrid 
assembly  with  Sanger  reads.  Contig-level  editing,  such  as 
break  and  rejoin,  can  then  be  performed  on  the  basis  of 
mate  pair  information  that  is  derived  from  the  Sanger  reads
that  are  aligned  on  them.  We  propose  to  use  a  constant 
offset  between  pseudoreads  for  simplicity.  C,  pseudoreads 
can  be  compared  with  each  other  as  well  as  incoming 
Sanger  reads  as  originally  suggested  by  Goldberg  et al.

Hybrid  Genome  Assembly  Strategy    89

sembly  possible,  in  which  pre-existing  contigs  are  re-
tained  and  compared  with  new  reads  (Pop  and  Kosack, 
2004).  It  is  different  from  Add  New  Reads  in  CONSED 
in  that  incoming  reads  also  are  compared  pairwise. 
After  that,  users  can  break  or  rejoin  regions  that  are  de-
rived  from  GS  contigs  on  the  basis  of  pseudoread 
overlap.
    If  the  user  is  willing  to  finish  the  genome  sequencing 
(left  part  of  Fig.  1),  the  relative  abundance  of  Sanger 
reads  over  454  pyrosequence  data  should  be  con-
sidered.  When  the  amount  of  available  Sanger  reads  is 
low  as  compared  with  that  of  454  data,  virtual  reads 
from  GS  contigs  and  Sanger  reads  can  be  assembled 
by  PHRAP,  as  mentioned  above.  If  there  is  more  than 
2∼3X  greater  coverage  of  Sanger  data  available,  often 
it  is  better  to  produce  overlapping  pseudoreads  with 
varying  offset  between  adjacent  reads  to  reflect  raw 
read  depth  along  the  assembly.  In  this  case,  running 
PCAP  (Huang et al.,  2003)  or  CelAsm  on  a  multiproces-
sor  machine  is  a  good  choice  for  mixed  assembly,  be-
cause  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pseudoreads  are  pro-
from  GS  assembly  with  ∼20X  sequencing 
duced 
coverage.  We  have  written  two  simple  Perl  scripts  that 
(1)  break  contigs  at  low  read  coverage  (＜2)  and  (2)  pro-
duce  overlapping  pseudoreads  that  take  into  account 
read  depth  from  the  454Contigs.ace  file.
    When  pseudoreads  are  generated  either  with  constant 
offset  or  with  varying  ones  that  reflect  the  raw  read 
depth,  assignment  of  an  appropriate  quality  score  can 
be  an  issue.  Because  GS  contigs  usually  have  a  uniform 
quality  score  over  the  entire  length,  a  constant  value 
such  as  10∼20  should  be  adequate  for  most  appli-
cations.  Setting  a  lower  quality  value  -  for  example,  by 
dividing  all  454  phred  quality  score  values  by  4  -  might 
be  assigned,  as  there  are  concerns  about  exaggerated 
quality  scores  (http://www.genome.ou.edu/454proto/454- 
LongreadsontheGS20v3.html).
    Small  contigs  that  are  produced  by  gsAssembler, 
which  often  are  generated  from  repetitive  regions  from 
the  genome,  sometimes  contain  useful  information  that 
is  relevant  to  repeat-induced,  over-collapsed  misassem-
bly.  Because  they  occupy  a  small  amount  of  the  assem-
bly  result,  they  can  be  maintained  as  they  are  with  GS 
raw  read  information,  such  that  re-assembly  and  read- 
level  manipulation  are  possible  in  CONSED.  A  hybrid 
ACE  file  that  consists  of  virtual  reads  and  real  454  as-
semblies  can  be  made  easily  by  simple  text  editing.

Whole-genome  Resequencing

runMapping  is  the  most  convenient  way  to  identify  SNP- 
type  genomic  differences  by  aligning  454  pyrosequenc-
ing  reads  to  the  reference  sequence.  In  addition  to  as-

90    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  87-90,  June  2008

Fig.  3.  Identifying  differences  between  the  sample  and  the 
reference  by  comparing  the  results  of  the  454  pyrosequenc-
ing  data  that  are  directly  mapped  to  the  reference  sequence
and  the  alignment  of  the de novo  assembled  contigs  to  the 
reference.  The  closed  circle  denotes  a  sequence  mismatch 
that  is  represented  only  by  one  contig  set.

sembly  results,  high-confidence  differences  also  are 
written  to  a  text  file  (454HCDiffs.txt)  in  which  there  are 
at  least  three  reads,  one  read  for  each  direction.  This 
application  usually  produces  larger  contigs  in  smaller 
numbers  than  gsAssembler  does,  if  the  reference  ge-
nome  sequence  is  sufficiently  close  to  the  sample.
    In  most  cases,  however,  variations  occur,  rather  than 
base-to-base  alterations  (SNPs  and  small  indels)  such  as 
large-scale  insertions,  deletions,  inversions,  and  translo-
cations.  Identical  copies  of  IS  elements  are  a  main 
cause  of  genome  rearrangements.  Genomic  segments 
that  are  horizontally  transferred  from  other  bacteria  or  re-
gions  that  are  genetically  manipulated  on  purpose  can-
not  be  identified  by  a  standard  runMapping  procedure. 
For  example,  sample-specific  deletion  poses  no  454  raw 
reads  on  the  region  that  corresponds  to  the  reference 
sequence.  If  de novo-assembled  contigs  are  aligned  to 
the  reference  sequence,  however,  contigs  that  span  the 
deleted  segment  will  easily  be  identified  due  to  its  partial 
alignment  and  discrepancy  with  the  reference.
    We  therefore  suggest  using  contig  sets  that  are  de-
rived  from  de novo  assembly  (gsAssembler)  and  map-
ped  assembly  (gsMapper)  to  uncover  the  maximum 
number  of  possible  differences  (Fig.  3).  The  actual  pro-
cedure  is  similar  to  the  one  that  is  shown  in  the  center 
panel  of  Fig.  1.  Two  sets  of  GS-derived  contigs  are 
converted  to  virtual  chromatograms  and  accompanying 
PHD  files.  In  this  case,  the  reference  sequence  also  is 
converted  to  a  single  sequence  read.  It  is  then  con-
verted  to  a  contig  via  a  PHD  file,  and  two  contig  sets 
that  are  derived  from  the  GS  data  (as  virtual  reads)  will 
be  added  in  CONSED  using  Add  New  Reads.  Because 
the  number  of  reads  that  is  to  be  added  will  be  around 
100  or  more,  we  highly  recommend  inspecting  the  in-
dividual  alignment  result  in  CONSED.  Each  insertion/ 
deletion/inversion  candidate  is  then  subject  to  confirma-
tion  by  PCR  amplification  of  the  suspicious  area  and 
end  sequencing  of  the  product.  It  is  better  to  confirm 
SNP-type  variations  that  might  appear  in  only  one  set 
of  contigs,  too  (filled  circle  in  Fig.  3).

    In  454  pyrosequencing-based  genome  projects,  we 
have  successfully  applied  this  hybrid  approach  either  for 
de novo  sequencing  or  for  resequencing.  They  include 
Escherichia coli  BL21(DE3)  and  its  derivatives  (rese-
quencing),  Donghaeana dokdonensis DSW-6  (de novo 
sequencing),  Hansenula polymorpha DL-1  (de novo  se-
quencing),  and  a  few  others.  Resolving  highly  repetitive 
reads  that  are  usually  piled  up  as  short,  high-depth  con-
tigs  is  still  a  challenging  task.  Maintaining  raw  reads  and 
their  assembly  structures  that  are  generated  from  repeti-
tive  regions  and  combining  them  separately  with  other 
types  of  Sanger  data  (transposon-mediated  sequencing 
or  mini-scale  shotgun  for  fosmid  clones  that  harbor  re-
peats)  often  is  required  for  the  completion  of  a  454- 
based  genome  project.  Development  of  third-party  soft-
ware  that  is  optimized  for  short-read  fragment  assembly 
also  should  accelerate  advancements  in  the  new  era  of 
genome  technology  (Sundquist  et al.,  2007).

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  the  21st  Century  Frontier 
Microbial  Genomics  and  Applications  Center  Program, 
Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology,  Korea.

References

Chaisson,  M.J.,  and  Pevzner,  P.A.  (2008).  Short  read  frag-
ment  assembly  of  bacterial  genomes.  Genome Res. 18, 
324-330.

Goldberg,  S.M.,  Johnson,  J.,  Busam,  D.,  Feldblyum,  T., 
Ferriera,  S.,  and  Friedman,  R., et al. (2006).  A  Sanger/py-
rosequencing  hybrid  approach  for  the  generation  of  high- 
quality  draft  assemblies  of  marine  microbial  genomes. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,  11240-11245.

Huang,  X.,  Wang,  J.,  Aluru,  S.,  Yang,  S.P.,  and  Hillier,  L. 
(2003).  PCAP:  a  whole-genome  assembly  program. 
Genome Res. 13,  2164-2170.

Huson,  D.H.,  Reinert,  K.,  Kravitz,  S.A.,  Remington,  K.A., 
Delcher,  A.L.,  Dew,  I.M., et al. (2001).  Design  of  a  com-
partmentalized  shotgun  assembler 
the  human 
genome.  Bioinformatics 17  Suppl  1,  S132-139.

for 

Margulies,  M.,  Egholm,  M.,  Altman,  W.E.,  Attiya,  S.,  Bader, 
J.S.,  Bemben,  L.A.,  et al. (2005).  Genome  sequencing  in 
microfabricated  high-density  picolitre  reactors.  Nature 
437,  376-380.

Pop,  M.,  and  Kosack,  D.  (2004).  Using  the  TIGR  assembler 
in  shotgun  sequencing  projects.  Methods Mol. Biol. 255, 
279-294.

Shendure,  J.,  Mitra,  R.D.,  Varma,  C.,  and  Church,  G.M. 
(2004).  Advanced  sequencing  technologies:  methods  and 
goals.  Nat. Rev. Genet. 5,  335-344.

Sundquist,  A.,  Ronaghi,  M.,  Tang,  H.,  Pevzner,  P.,  and 
Batzoglou,  S.  (2007).  Whole-genome  sequencing  and  as-
sembly  with  high-throughput,  short-read  technologies. 
PLoS ONE 2,  e484.

