Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(3) 142-146, September 2004 

Web Services Based Biological Data Analysis Tool 

Min Kyung Kim\ Yo Hahn Choi2,  Seong Joon 
Yoo2 and Hyun Seok Park1·3* 

1 Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering, 
Ewha  University,  Seoul  12Q-750,  Korea,  2School  of 
Computer  Science  and  Engineering,  Sejong  University, 
Seoul  143-747,  Korea,  3lnstitute  of  Bioinformatics, 
Macrogen  Inc.,  Seoul  153-023,  Korea 

Abstract 
Biological  data and  analysis  tools  are  accumulated  in 
distributed databases and web servers. For this reason, 
biologists  who  want  to  find  information  from  the  web 
should be aware of the various kinds of resources where 
it is located and how it is  retrieved.  Integrating the data 
from  heterogeneous  biological  resources  will  enable 
biologists to discover new knowledge across the specific 
domain  boundaries  from  sequences  to  expression, 
structure,  and  pathway.  And 
inevitably  biological 
databases  contain  noisy  data.  Therefore,  consensus 
among  databases  will  confirm  the  reliability  of  its 
contents.  We  have  developed  WeSAT  that  integrates 
distributed and heterogeneous biological databases and 
analysis 
through  Web  Services 
protocols.  In  WeSAT,  biologists  are  retrieved  specific 
entries in SWISS-PROT/EMBL, PDB, and KEGG, which 
have annotated information about sequence, structure, 
and  pathway.  And 
is  carried  by 
integrated  services  for  example  homology search  and 
multiple  alignments.  WeSAT  makes  it  possible  to 
retrieve  real  time  updated  data and  analysis  from  the 
scattered  databases  in  a single  platform through  Web 
Services. 

tools,  providing 

further  analysis 

Keywords: database integration, platform, web services 

Introduction 
Various databases contain a different subset of biological 
knowledge  for  example  species  such  as  Flybase  and 
Wormbase  (Fly  consortium,  2003,  Harris  eta/.,  2004) 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail neo@ewha.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831, Fax +82-2-3277-2306 
Accepted  16 August 2004 

versus  sequence  and  structure  such  as  Genbank and 
PDB  (Benson  et  a/.,  2004;  Westbrook  et  a/.,  2004). 
Researchers who  want to answer questions that span 
domain  boundaries  should  be  surfing  the  web.  For 
example,  structural  information  will  be  useful  for  the 
identification  of  interaction  sites  between  interacting 
proteins,  or  orthologous  protein  data  can  be  used  in 
function prediction, and so on.  Not only the quantity but 
also the quality of information will  be  increasing during 
the process of integration.  Due to the characteristics of 
biological  data,  biological  databases inevitably contain 
noisy  data.  Through  the  collected  data  from  different 
sources, the reliability could be voted from the redundancy. 
Thus,  rapid  growth  of  databases  in  the  public 
biological  domains  makes  it  difficult  to  maintain  and 
access  updated  data.  On 
the  other  hand,  data 
integration in the biological domain has been attempted 
through two different approaches,  which are in  striking 
contrast  to  another:  federation  and  data  warehousing 
(Stein, 2003). 

Federation  approach  means  one  database  would 
query the others in the terms understood by the others. It 
has  advantages 
in  aspect  of  up-to-date  and 
maintenance.  But its availability  and  reliability was not 
sufficient,  when  dealing  with  alteration  of  schema  or 
address in data resources. The stability and persistence 
of URLs published in  MEDLINE is not guaranteed and 
-37%  of  these  URLs  and  -64%  of  ftp  were  not 
consistently available (Wren, 2004). 

Data warehousing integrates diverse data to the one 
root with global schema. Still, data warehousing method 
provides an  effective solution  for extraction,  usage and 
analysis  of  the  biological  information.  Global  schema 
design, which is based on current available information, 
is not feasible to agree without interruption. For example, 
interaction data not only increase the entity (i.e.  protein 
interact  with  other  partners)  but  also  the  content  of 
information (i.e.  which domain, condition, and so on). 

ISYS is a CORBA based biological data analysis tool 
(Siepel  eta/.,  2001).  ISYS  provides an  environment of 
integrated  services  such  as  sequence  viewer and  Zit 
does  not  support  automated  workflow  method.  Still, 
result of each service runs slowly and is not fed into next 
service module automatically. 

Web  Services  is  one of the  most recent  integration 
methods,  which  provide  data  through  standard  user 

interface,  recording  their  up-to-date  (Stein,  2002).  It 
makes it possible to automatically up-to-date secondary 
databases  which  are  distributed  all  over  the  world.  In 
field of bioinformatics research, Web Services has been 
used on  several web sites such as KEGG (Kanehisa et 
a/, 2004), Ensemble (Cuff eta/, 2004), Flybase, and etc. 
In aspect of secondary databases, the ability to access 
any  data  across  multiple  disparate  databases  and 
up-to-date data from different data sources at run-time is 
characteristic feature of Web Services approach. 

Currently available integrated environments by Web 
Services  protocols  are  myGRID  (Stevens  eta/.,  2003) 
and  BioMoby  (Wilkinson  et  a/.,  2002).  myGRID  is 
designed  for  data  or  service  provider,  which  build 
applications  for  biologist.  The  scope  of  BioMoby  is 
confined  to service  description,  discovery,  transaction, 
and simple input/output object type. Therefore, it is not a 
usable system for biologists. 

As  shown  in  Table  1,  WeSAT is  first trial  to  provide 
Web  Services  protocol  integrated  system  to  biologist, 
which has advantage ( 1) availability (2) real time updated 
data  providing  (3)  analysis  tool  integrating.  We  have 
integrated  several  biological  data  servers  including 
KEGG,  DDBJ,  EMBL,  and  PDB  (Table.  2).  Users  can 
access  sequence,  structure,  pathway  and 
literature 
databases and several tools such as Blast, ClustaiW, and 
TxSearch (Table 3).  In addition, data accessed from one 
transaction  can  be  automatically  fed  into  next  service 
modules. 

Table  1.  Integration  systems  that  provide  databases  and/or 
tools in a single platform are listed.  -'"--"~·---·-
Integration 

m--in'tegrating 

System 

Method 

Objects 

User 

Kleisli 

Federated 

Data 

ENSEMBL  Data warehousing  Data 

ISYS 

CORBA 

Data 

Biologist 

Biologist 

Biologist 

myGRID  Web Services 

Data and tools  System developer 

BioMOBY  Web Services 

Data and tools  System developer 

WeSAT 

Web Services 

Data and tools  Biologist 

Table 2.  List of WeSAT accessible databases. _______ __ 
External  Module 

Accessible Databases 

Data format 

Web Services Based Biological Data Analysis Tool  143 

Methods 
System Architecture 
Any program is callable by another program across the 
web  in  a  way  that  is  platform-independent,  language(cid:173)
independent,  and object model-independent. The Web 
Services  architecture  describes  three  roles:  service 
provider, service requester, service registry. Three basic 
operations are:  publishing,  finding,  and  binding.  These 
operations use next generation infrastructure standards: 
XML,  SOAP, WSDL, and UDDI. 

First, service provider publishes their services, which 
are  described  by  WSDL  (Web  Services  Description 
Language), at service registry. UDDI (Universal Description 
Discovery and Integration) enables enterprises to quickly 
and dynamically discover and invoke Web Services both 
internally and  externally.  Next,  service  requester could 
find their services in  service registry.  After services are 
found  once  in  registry,  this  service  could  be  found 
directly from service provider via SOAP (Simple Object 
Access  Protocol)  and  these  processes  are  called 
binding.  SOAP  is  an  XML  notation  for  describing  how 
messages  are  assembled  and  transmitted  over  HTIP 
between  service 
(clients)  and  service 
providers (servers). Web Services is methods of providing 
their  data  to  the  requester  in  unrestricted  manner 
according to their schema or written language. 

requesters 

Figure  1 shows overall  architecture of Web §ervice 
based  Analysis  Iool  (WeSAT).  WeSAT  has  three 
components:  External  Application  module,  Local  Web 
Services search module and Graphic Viewer module. 

-----to  Query 
•·~·  ·  Result 
SOAP 

Fig.  1. System Architecture ofWeSAT. 

KEGG 

DDBJ 

EMBL 

PDB 

KEGG,  EMBL 

Text 

DDBJ,  SWISS-PROT,  PDB,  PIR  Text 

EMBL,  PUBMED 

PDB 

XML 

XML 

External Application and UDDI registry search 
module 
External  databases  are  linked  through  the  external 
application module (KEGG,  DDBJ,  EMBL,  and PDB) as 

144  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 2(3) 142-146, September 2004 

Graphic viewer module 
Currently available SOAP data types are simple, complex, 
and  binary,  which could  back up not only text but also 
graphic information.  However, web serviced data types 
in  the  biological  domain  are  limited  in  text  types 
nowadays. 

. 

Usually biological  data are  understood  more  eas1ly 
when  graphical  information  such  as  pathway  image  in 
KEGG  and  genome  browser for  genome  map  data  is 
provided  together.  For  this  reason,  we  developed 
graphic  viewer  module  for  pathway  data.  In  WeSAT, 
KEGG  pathway data are  presented text  and  graphical 
mode  that  provided  through  graphic  viewer  mode  or 
direct  link  via  map  URL  as  shown  in  figure  3.  This 
module could be used in interaction network data, which 
will be added in the near future. 

shown Table 2 (Sugawara eta/., 2003). Especially, DDBJ 
Web Services provides their own data and other services 
such  as  Blast,  ClustaiW,  ExCiustaiW,  Fasta,  GetEntry, 
Gib, Gtop, PML, SRS, and TxSearch which are described 
by  WSDL  description.  XEMBL  contains  annotated 
information of genes and BQS is literature retrieval system 
in  EMBL.  PDB  module  provides  structural  information  of 
protein  in . the  format  of  XML,  PDBj-Ml.  Through  the 
external  application  module  in  WeSAT,  we  can  access 
KEGG,  EMBL,  DDBJ,  SWISS-PROT,  PDB,  PIR,  and 
PUBMED data.  By using these soap servers, WeSAT is 
able  to  directly  access  biological  objects  from  data 
sources,  irrespective to the  change  of the  data formats 
and  addresses.  UDDI  registry  search  module  will  be 
added to the system and expected to perform the finding 
of updated Web Services in UDDI  registry. 

Local Web Services module 
Besides  the  integration  of  provided  Web  Services, 
WeSAT  also  provides  Web  Services  of  specific 
methods.  These  methods  make  it  possible  to  access 
categorized  information  in  SWISS-PROT,  EMBL,  and 
Genbank  data  using  Biojava.  Through  this  module, 
users can pick the specific information, for example, FT 
or  DR  lines  in  SWISS-PROT.  It  can  also  be  used  as 
parsers, which could extract the desired fields in an entry 
for later analysis through a simple request. 

Its  implementation  is  based  on  SOAP  protocols 
contained in  JWSDP1.3 (Java Web Services  Developer 
Pack  1.3)  of  Microsystems  and  web  sever  engine 
(TOMCAT4.1).  By exchanging the WSDL document,  we 
service  this  type  of  local  Web  Services  to  the  service 
requester. Figure 2 shows a part of WSDL descriptions for 
this service. 

Fig.  3.  Graphical  view of pathway information  in  WeSAT. 
WeSAT provides pathway information, which is originated in 
KEGG,  through  two  different  modes.  The  upper  is  a 
snapshot  of  eco00300  path  through  the  graphic  viewer 
module  in  WeSAT.  The  lower  is  the  other  show  that  is 
represented as KEGG via URL. 

User Interfaces 
User  Interface  of  WeSAT  is  shown  in  Figure  4.  Top 

Fig. 2. WSDL description for local Web Services of WeSAT. 

menu consists of external/local/search service. External 
service menu are divided into KEGG,  DDBJ EMBL, and 
PDB Web Services.  Local services are category for our 
own developed web services. Search service menus are 
proposed to retrieve for UDDI  registry. 

Through 

the  user  interface,  clients  surfing  the 
information across the subject for example sequence in 
EMBL,  structure  in  PDB,  pathway  in  KEGG  and 
literature in Medline. Figure 4 illustrates the navigation of 
KEGG/DDBJ/SWISS-PROT in WeSAT. 

Fig. 4.  User interface  of WeSAT which  makes  it  possible to 
access to heterogeneous subject databases. 

WeSAT  currently  navigates  databases  via  cross(cid:173)

references.  Especially,  we  use  SWISS-PROT  that 
provides diverse cross-references except KEGG, which 
has cross- reference about SWISS-PROT id.  Although 
only  a  small  portion  of  proteins  are  not  annotated  in 
SWISS-PROT/ EMBL,  they  are  not  linked with  across 
databases in  WeSAT.  For these proteins,  local  BLAST 
could be used, because sequences are a usable key for 
finding the same proteins. 

Result and Discussion 
WeSAT is a prototype version of web serviced data and 
service integration that could access multiple databases 
(KEGG,  DDBJ,  EMBL,  SWISS-PROT,  PDB,  PIR,  and 
PUBMED)  and  diverse  services  (Blast,  ClustalW, 
FASTA,  TxSearch,  and  etc).  The  client communicates 
with  other  servers  and  services  through  WeSAT.  The 
client of WeSAT is biologist and it makes distinguishable 
from other web serviced systems. 

WeSAT  access  scattered  resources 

remote 
condition, therefore maintenance is more convenient than 
centralized  approaches.  This  integration  approach  is 
guaranteed 
for 
updated information and save bioinformaticians' time and 

in 

to  provide  biologists' 

requirement 

Web Services Based Biological Data Analysis Tool  145 

effort tor maintenance. Web Services approaches make it 
possible  for  bioinformatician  to  integrate  biological 
sources,  get  over  integration  difficulties  and  focus  on 
their effort in knowledge discovery/data mining from the 
integrated data. 

Most  distinguishable  advantages  of  Web  Services 
integrations are real time updated and reusability of data. 
The amount of accumulated biological data keeps growing 
at  an  exponential  rate  and  therefore,  the databases are 
continuously updated. Secondary databases are inevitably 
acted on concert with primary databases. Therefore, there 
is  massive  duplication  of  effort  in  multiple  secondary 
databases  originated  from  the  same  databases.  Even 
more, the change of database schema is disastrous for 
bioinformatician  who  aggregate  data  from  different 
sources.  Bioinformatician and  biologist could get more 
complete data set and it will  be a basis for data mining 
and  knowledge  discovery.  Although  providing  data via 
Web  Services  protocols  is  additional  work  for  data 
provider, 
it  will  maximize  reusability  of  data  and 
minimize the  obstacle of  data assembly.  Integration  of 
data  based  on  Web  Services  will  get  better  as  more 
databases  and  tools  are  web  serviced.  Because,  the 
result  of  each  service  is  automatically  transferred  to 
different analysis module unlike CORBA based system. 
Protein  or  gene  name  could  not  be  used  as  an 
identifier  across  databases  because  of  synonyms  or 
different types  of  representations.  Identifying the  same 
entity in different databases is not an easy task.  For this 
reason, the function of allowing cross-database queries 
is  not 
implemented  at  this  moment,  but  will  be 
implemented in the near  future. 

Acknowledgement 

This work was supported by the Ministry of Information 
and  Communication  of  Korea  under  grant  number 
IMT200J-AB-05. WeSAT is available at http://wvwv.skyhani.corrt 

References 
Benson,  D.A.,  Karsch-Mizrachi,  1.,  Lipman,  D.J., Ostell, J., 
and  Wheeler,  D.L.  (2004).  GenBank:  update.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  32,  D23-26. 

Cuff,  J.A.,  Coates,  G.M.,  Cutts,  T.J.,  and  Rae,  M.  (2004). 
The Ensembl computing architecture.  Genome Res. 14, 
971-975. 

FlyBase Consortium.  (2003). The FlyBase database of the 
Drosophila genome projects  and  community literature. 
Nucleic Acids Res.  31,  172-175. 

Harris,  T.W.,  Chen,  N.,  Cunningham,  F.,  Tello-Ruiz,  M., 
Antoshechkin,  1.,  Bastiani,  C.,  Bieri,  T.,  Blasiar,  D., 

146  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(3)  142-146, September 2004 

Bradnam,  K.,  Chan,  J.,  Chen,  C.K.,  Chen,  W.J.,  Davis, 
P.,  Kenny,  E.,  Kishore,  R.,  Lawson,  D.,  Lee,  R.,  Muller, 
H.M.,  Nakamura,  C.,  Ozersky,  P.,  Petcherski,  A., 
Rogers,  A.,  Sabo,  A.,  Schwarz,  E.M.,  VanAuken,  K., 
Wang,  Q.,  Durbin,  R.,  Spieth, J.,  Sternberg,  P.W.,  and 
Stein, L.D. (2004). WormBase: a multi-species resource 
for nematode biology and genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 
32,  D411-417. 

Kanehisa,  M.,  Goto,  S.,  Kawashima,  S.,  Okuno,  Y.,  and 
Hattori,  M.  (2004). The KEGG resource for deciphering 
the genome.  Nucleic Acids Res.  32,  D277-280. 

Siepel,  A.,  Farmer,  A.,  Tolopko,  A.,  Zhuang,  M.,  Mendes, 
P.,  Beavis,  W.,  and  Sobral,  B. 
ISYS:  a 
decentralized,  component-based  approach 
the 
integration  of  heterogeneous  bioinformatics  resources. 
Bioinformatics.  17, 83-94. 

(2001). 

to 

Stein,  L.  (2002).  Creating  a  bioinformatics  nation.  Nature 

417.119-120. 

Stein,  L.D.  (2003).  Integrating  biological  databases.  Nat. 

Rev.  Genet. 4, 337-345. 

Stevens,  A.D.,  Robinson,  A.J.,  and  Goble,  C.A.  (2003). 
myGrid:  personalised bioinformatics on  the information 
grid.  Bioinformatics 19, i302-304. 

Sugawara,  H.  and  Miyazaki,  S.  (2003).  Biological  SOAP 
servers  and  web  services  provided  by  the  public 
sequence data bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 3836-3839. 
Westbrook, J.,  Feng,  Z.,  Chen,  L.,  Yang,  H.,  and  Berman, 
H.M.  (2003).  The  Protein  Data  Bank  and  structural 
genomics.  Nucleic Acids Res.  31, 489-491. 

Wilkinson,  M.D.  and  Links,  M.  (2002)  BioMOBY:  an  open 
source biological web services proposal. Brief Bioinform. 
3, 331-341. 

Wren,  J.D.  (2004).  404  not  found:  the  stability  and 
persistence of URLs published in MEDLINE. Bioinformatics 
20, 668-672. 

