Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification 

Hyosoo  Lee  and  Jong  Hoon  Park* 

Department  of  Biological  Science,  Sookmyung 
Women's  University,  Seoul  140-742,  Korea 

Abstract 

Gene expression  profiles  may  offer  more  information 
than  morphology  and  provide  an  alternative  to 
morphology- based  tumor  classification  systems. 
Informative  gene  selection  is finding  gene  subsets 
that  are  able  to  discriminate  between  tumor  types, 
and  may  have  clear  biological  interpretation.  Gene 
selection is a fundamental  issue  in gene expression 
based tumor  classification.  In  this  report,  techniques 
for  selecting  informative  genes  are  illustrated  and 
supervised  shaving  introduced  as  a  gene selection 
method  in  the  place  of  a  clustering  algorithm.  The 
supervised 
good 
performance  in  gene selection  and  classification,  even 
though  it is a  clustering  algorithm.  Almost  selected 
genes are related  to  leukemia disease.  The  expression 
profiles  of  3051  genes  were  analyzed  in  27  acute 
lymphoblastic  leukemia  and  11  myeloid  leukemia 
samples.  Through  these  examples,  the  supervised 
shaving  method  has  been  shown 
to  produce 
biologically  significant  genes  of  more  than  94% 
accuracy of  classification.  In  this  report,  SVM  has  also 
been  shown  to  be  a  practicable  method  for  gene 
expression-based  classification. 

shaving  method 

showed 

Keywords: gene  expression;  gene  selection;  gene 
shaving;  microarray;  tumor  classification 

Introduction 
DNA  microarray  technology  generated  a  panoramic 
survey of  genes  expressed  in  a sample  of  cells.  When 
the  samples  correspond  to  different  pathological  states 
of  the  same  tissue  or  subtypes of  the  sample  malignancy, 
transcription  profiling  holds  promise  as  a  method  for 
classifying  and  analyzing  cancer  from  a  molecular  rather 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  parkjh@sookmyung.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-710-9414,  Fax  +82-2-2077-7322 
Accepted  11  March  2004 

than  morphological  perspective  (Aiizadeh  et at.,  2000, 
Alon  eta!.,  1999).  Several  studies  have  used  arrays to 
analyze  gene expression  in  the  colon,  breast  and  other 
tumors,  and  these  studies  have  demonstrated  the 
potential  utility of  expression  profiling  for  classifying 
tumors  (Perou  et a/.,  1999). 

Informative Gene  selection  is  an  important  component 
for  gene expression-based  tumor  classification  systems. 
A  large  numbers  of  genes  increase the  computational 
complexity and  cost,  and  compromise  the  generalization 
properties of  the  classifier.  It  is  recognized  that  the  higher 
the  ratio  of  the  number of  training  samples  to  the  number 
of  free  classifier  parameters,  the  better the  generalization 
properties  of  the  resulting  classifier.  A  large  number  of 
genes will  improve the  estimation  of  the  classification 
error.  Therefore,  reducing  the  dimensionality of  the  gene 
expression  information  is  a  key  issue  in  developing  a 
successful  gene  expression--based  tumor  classification 
system.  In  addition  to  reducing  noise  and  improving  the 
accuracy  of  tumor  classification,  a selected  subset  of 
genes,  with  high  accuracy of  classification,  may  be 
involved  in  the  pathways  or  some  biological  process 
leading  to  tumor  development and  have  important 
biological  meaning.  That  is,  these  informative  genes 
represent  putative  targets  for  therapeutic  agents  and 
understanding  the  basic  biology of  the  disorder.  A typical 
profiling  study  measures  the  expression  levels  of 
thousands  of  genes  (features)  L across tens of  samples 
N,  with  each  samples  labeled  as  being  of  one  type or 
another.  The  problem  to  be  considered  here  is  that  of 
identifying  marker  genes  given  N  labeled  L -features 
samples. 

The  method  introduced  by Golub  et at.  (1999)  was 
examined  to  focus  the  selection  of  genes  that  appear 
to  be  the  best  diagnostic  indicators.  This  amounts  to 
a  kind  of  dimensionality  reduction  of  the  dataset,  and 
shows  good  performance  in  tumor  type  classification. 
However,  the  subset  genes  were  found  not  to  correlate 
with  each  other,  and  some  genes do  not  have  a  biological 
meaningful  explanation.  In  order  to  improve  this  gene 
selection  method,  additional  effort  is  needed  to  develop 
ways  of  identifying  meaningful  genes  in  these  types  of 
dataset.  (Furey  eta/.,  2000) 

In  this  report,  we  propose  'supervised  shaving' 
clustering  analysis  of  gene  expression  data  is  proposed 
for  the  identification  of  gene subsets.  The  'supervised 
shaving'  is  designed  to  extract  coherent  and  small  clusters 
of  genes  that  vary  as  much  as  possible  across  the 

20  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

samples.  In  addition,  'supervised  shaving'  is  proposed 
via  the  incorporation  of  other  prognostic factors  in  the 
search  for  interesting  gene clusters  (Hastie  et at..  2000). 
As  a  result  of  'supervised  shaving'  as a  gene selection 
method,  more  biologically  meaningful  subsets of  genes 
were  obtained  in  a  cluster. 

The  gene selection  issue  has  been  addressed  under 
a  classification  framework  that  may  be  more  relevant 
to  the  clinical  application  in  a  diagnosis.  To  this  end, 
the use of SVM  has  been  present,  as a supervised  machine 
learning  technique,  for  the  classification  algorithms.  SVMs 
have  been  shown  to  perform  well  in  multiple  areas  of 
biological  analysis,  including  evaluating  microarray 
expression  data  (Brown  eta!.,  2000).  SVMs  have 
demonstrated  the ability to  not  only correctly separate 
entities  into appropriate classes,  but also  identify 
instances  whose  established  classification  is  not 
supported  by the  data.  Expression  datasets  contain 
measurements  for  thousands of  genes,  which  prove 
problematic  for  many traditional  methods.  SVMs  are  well 
suited  to  working  with  high  dimensional  data  such  as 
this. 

To  test  the  generality of  the  approach,  experiments 
were  run  using  the  leukemia  data from  Golub  et at.  (1999) 
(72  patient  samples).  Clustered  genes,  due to  PCA  based 
'supervised  shaving'  were  shown  to  achieve  high 
accuracy of  classification,  and  that  the  selected  genes 
can  be  used  as  biomarkers for  tumor  classification. 

Methods 

Gene  expression  data  from  acute  leukemia 
A data set,  well  known  for  human  acute  leukemia  samples, 
originally analyzed  by Golub  et at.  was  used.  The  raw 
dataset  can  be  obtained at:  http://www.broad.mit.edu/ 
cgi-bin/cancer/ datasets.cgi.  The  dataset  consisted  of 
the expression  profiles of  6817  genes from  47 ALL  and 
25  AML  samples. 

The  first  step  in  out  process of  analyzing  these  data 
was  to  perform  the  basic transformations  reported  in  Golub 
1999.  The  transformations  set  the  minimum  expression 
values  to  100  and  the  maximum  to  16000,  and  then  the 
genes that  are  beyond  these  limits  are filtered  out.  The 

.. ..... 

·.· 

... 

............ ·· .. 

·················•······ 

· .......... · ............ .. 

¥ ............. . .. ........ . · .. ··. ·· ... •. 

Fig.  1.  Supervised  shaving  result.  The  left  column  represent  cluster 1 and  the  right  cluster  2.  The  first  row  is  the  gap curve  estimated 
cluster size  and  the  second  the  variance  plots  for  real  and  randomized  data.  The  third  row  is  the gene expression  level  across 
the  samples  in  each  cluster.  Almost  all  the  left  side  (green)  samples  are ALL  and  those  on  the  right  side  (red)  are  AML. 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification  21 

filtering  process  selected  3051  genes that  seemed  worthy 
of  further  investigation.  The  filtering  was  not  especially 
robust,  in  the  sense  that  it  was  based  on  the  minimum 
or  maximum  expression  values  between  subjects.  This 
was  a  non-specific filter.  The  genes  were  selected 
according  to  their  variability,  and  not  with  respect  to  their 
ability to  classify  any  particular  set  of  samples.  In  this 
analysis,  the  genes  were  selected  according  to their 
behavior  in  the  training  set.  If  the  same  gene selection 
methods  were  applied  to  the  test  set,  a  different  set  of 
genes would  be selected  in  the test  set,  despite the 
identical  selection  process.  Due  to  the  need  to  compare 
and  combine  the  analyses  that  approach  could  not  be 
used: the  same  genes,  not  just  the  same  filters,  must 
be  employed  in  both  phases  of  the  analysis. 

Multiple  t-tests 

Permutation  adjusted  p-values for  the  maxT  procedure, 
with  Welch  t-statistics,  were  computed.  The  adjusted 
p-values for  the  maxT and  minP  step-down  multiple 
testing  procedures  are  described  in  Westfall  and  Young 
(1993).  The  bioconductor's  multitest  packages were  used, 
which  contain  a  collection  of  functions  for  multiple 
hypotheses  testing,  implemented  using  R language. 
These functions  can  be  used  to  identify  differentially 
expressed  genes  in  microarray  experiments,  that  is, 
genes  whose  expression  levels  are  associated  with  a 
response  or  covariate  of  interest.  The  17  genes  with  the 
smallest  adjusted  p-value  were  selected  for  the 
classification  analysis. 

Prediction  strength  (PS)  and  gene  selection 

Golub  et at.  proposed  the  use  of  a  collection  of  known 
samples  to  generate a  "class  predictor"  which  is  then 
able to  assign  a  new  sample  to  one  of  two  classes.  This 
predictor  is  created  with  the  aid of  'prediction  strength'. 
Let  ~(g), 51(g)]  and  [i,Q(g),  .92{g)]  denote  the  means  and 
standard  deviation  of  the  log  of  the  expression  levels 
of  gene g in two  samples,  respectively.  Then,  PSis defined 
as 

PS(g) = I fl.  ,(g)  -fl.  2(g) I 

s,(g)  -

s2(g) 

We  calculate  PS  scores,  which  give the  highest score 
to those  genes  whose  expression  levels,  differ  most  on 
average  in  the  two  classes  while  also  favoring  those 
with  small  deviations  in  scores  in  the  respective  classes. 
We  then  simply take  the  genes  with  the  top  17  ranked 
PS  scores  as  our  top  features. 

'Supervised  shaving'  as  a  gene  selection  method 

Gene  shaving,  introduced  by  Hastie  et at.,  is  a method 
for  exploratory analysis of  gene  expression  microarray 
data.  It  tries  to  identify subset  of  genes with  coherent 
expression  patterns  with  large variation  across  samples. 
The  method  differ form  hierarchical  clustering  method 
in  that  genes  may  belong  to  more  than  one  cluster,  and 
the  clustering  can  be  un-supervised,  treat  the  genes 
and  samples  as  unlabeled,  or  partially or fully  supeNised 
by  known  properties  of  genes/samples. 

Gene  shaving  is  an  iterative  algorithm  based  on  the 
principal  components  or the  singular  value  decomposition 
(SVD)  of  the  data  matrix.  It  starts  with  the entire  microarray 
gene expression  matrix  A  and  seeks  a  function  of  the 
genes  in  the  direction  of  maximal  variation  across  the 
samples.  The  simplest form  of  this function  is  a normalized 
linear  combination  of  the  genes  weighted  by  its  largest 
principal  component  loadings,  referred  to  as  the  super 
gene.  The  genes  may  be sorted  according  to the  principal 
component  weights.  A  fraction  a  of  the  genes  having 
lowest  correlation  (essentially the absolute  inner  product) 
with  the  super  gene  are  then  shaved  off  from  the  original 
data  matrix.  The  process  of  calculating  the  leading 
principal  component  and  shaving  off  some  genes  is 
iterated  on  the  reduced  data  matrix  until  only two  genes 
remain.  This  iterative  to-down  process  produces a 
sequence of  nested  gene  blocks  of  sizes  ranging  from 
the  full  set  of  N genes  down  to  the  final  block consisting 
of  just  two  genes. 

The  method  requires  a  quality  measure  for  a  cluster. 
In  particular,  a Gap  estimation  is  used  to  select  the  optimal 
number  of  genes  in  a  cluster,  which  is  based  on  the 
between  and  within  variances  of  the  clusters form  the 
raw  data  matrix  and  its  permutation.  The  number  of 
permutations  should  be  specified  in  the  analysis  of  gene 
shaving  tor  a  microrray  data.  The  next  step  is  to  remove 
the  effect  of  genes  in  the  optimal  cluster,  c;  say,  from 
the  original  matrix A.  By  computing  the  average  gene 
or ffie  vector  of  column  average for  c;,  denoted  by  c;, 
we  can  remove  the  component  that  is  correlated  with 
this  average.  This  is  equivalent  to  regressing  each  row 
of  A  on  the  average  gene  row  c;,  and  replacing  the 
former  with  the  regression  residuals.  Such  a  process 
is  referred  to  as  orthogonalization  by  Hastie  eta!.,  from 
which  a  modified  data  matrix  Aonho  is  produced.  With 
Aonm, , the  whole  process  is  repeated  of  calculating  the 
leading  principal  component,  producing  another  nested 
sequence  of  shaved  gene  blocks,  applying  the  Gap 
statistic to  obtain  the  next  optimal  cluster  C2,  and 
orthogonalizing  the  current  data  matrix.  This  sequence 
of  operations  is  iterated  until  L gene clusters  c;,  A,  CL 

22  Genomics  & Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

are found,  which  can  be  displayed  graphically for  visual 
inspection. 

'Supervised  shaving'  is  a  modification  of  gene  shaving. 
Full  or  partial  supervised  shaving  for  class  discrimination 
can  be carried  out  if  the  information  of  the  column  (sample) 
classification  is  available.  In  particular,  an  indicator vector 
with  the  length  of  samples  is  needed to  specify the  sample 
classification. 

When  fully  supervised,  the  shaving  procedure  reduces 
to  simply  ranking  the  genes.  Thus  there  is  no  role  for 
principal  components  or  top-down  shaving  in  this  case. 
However,  to encourage coherence within  the  gene 
clusters,  it  can  be  better to  use  a  partially supervised 
criterion,  which  does  use  principal  components  and 
top-down  shaving. 

In  case  of  Golub's  acute  leukemia  data,  we  use  labeled 
38 training  data  sets samples with  ALL  or AML and  partially 
supervised  shaving  method  with  10  times  permutation. 

SVMs  training  and  evaluation. 

SVMs  are a  relatively  new type of  learning  algorithm, 
originally  introduced  by Vapnik and  co-workers (Vapnik, 
1998)  and  successively extended  by a  number  of  other 
researchers.  Their  remarkably  robust  performance  with 
respect  to  sparse and  noisy data  is  making  them  the 
system  of  choice  in  a  number of  applications from  text 
categorization  to  protein  function  prediction. 

When  used  for  classification,  they  separate  a  given 
set  of  binary-labeled  training  data  with  a  hyper-plane 
that  is  maximally  distant  from  them  (known  as  'the  maximal 
margin  hyper-plane').  For  cases  in  which  no  linear 
separation  is  possible,  they can  work  in  combination 
with  the  technique of  'kernels'.  That  automatically  realizes 
q  non-linear  mapping  to  a  feature  space.  The 
hyper-plane  found  by  the  SVM  in  feature  space 
corresponds to  a  non-linear decision  boundary  in  the 
input  space.  That  is,  estimating  an  SVM  requires 
specifying  an  inner-product  kernel  function,  a  measure 
of  similarity  between  two  profile  vectors  XiL = {x;1,  K, x 
iL}  and  X 1L = {xi1,  K, x 1Ll,  where xiL  and x 1L are  gene 
expression  level  of  gene  L for  samples  belonging  to  class 
i and J.  Since  there  is  no general  theory for  determining 
the  most  appropriate  kernel  for  a  particular  learning 
problem,  'radial  basis'  kernel  function  suggested  that 
superior  to the  other  methods  (Brown  et at.,  1999).  'Radial 
basis'  kernel  function  M.XiL,  xiL) = exp(- II  xiL - XiL  II  2* 
y  ),  where  y  = 1/2o  2  is a user-defined width  parameter. 
Because  of  the  limited  number of  training  examples, 
a  leave-one-out cross  validation  strategy was  utilized. 
A  pool  of  N training  data  set  was  partitioned  into two 
disjoint  sets.  The  estimation  set,  ~1 examples,  was  used 
to  determine the  parameters  of  an  SVM,  and  the test 

set,  1 example,  was  used  to  assess  its  generalization 
performance  (here,  N= 38).  The  label  assigned  by a 
trained  SVM  to  a  test  example  can  be  a  true  positive 
(known  positive test  example,  assigned  positive  label), 
true  negative  (negative  example,  negative  label),  false 
positive (negative  example,  positive  label),  or false 
negative  (positive  example,  negative  label). 

Golub's  72  leukemia  samples  were  partitioned  into 
estimation  and  test  set  containing  38  and  34  samples, 
respectively.  The  generalization  performance  of  this  '38 
estimation,  34  test'  partitioning  is  how  many  of  the  34 
test  examples  were  assigned  to  be  true  positives or true 
negatives. 

Results 

Gene  selection  method  comparison 
In  order to  compare the  'supervised  shaving'  method 
with  other  gene selection  techniques,  other  methods; 
multiple t-test and  'Prediction  Strength'  (PS  method)  were 
also addressed.  Both  of  these  have  previously  been 
applied  to the  gene selection  method  in  another  published 
study  (Xiong  et at.,  2001).  The  gene  list  in  table  1-3 
represents  the  result  of  each  gene selection  method. 
17  genes  in  two  clusters  from  'supervised  shaving'(Fig. 
1),  and  17 top  ranked  genes  in  two other  methods  were 
obtained.  To  ensure  fairness  in  the  gene  numbers,  the 
same  numbers  of  genes  from  three  methods  were 
obtained.  Although  the  precise composition  of  the 17 
genes  differed,  each  set  of  genes was  effective  in  terms 
of  discriminating  between  different tumor  types.  The  small 
overlap  in  terms  of the  specific  genes  may  suggest  the 
presence  of  many  gene subsets  for  a given  cardinality 
that  are equally well  generalized.  However,  there are 
no  common  genes  in  the  multiple tests;  the  PS  and 
supervised  shaving  methods.  Only  small  overlaps existed 
between  the  two  methods.  It  should  be  understood,  that 
these  three  methods  have  very  different  basic  concept 
in  analysis.  In  other words,  PCA  based  'supervised 
clustering'  captures  the  variance  in  a dataset  in  terms 
of  principle components,  but  other two  methods  are  not 
dependent on  variation  but  difference of  mean  values 
of  each  samples.  A  union  set  of  three  gene  lists was 
also  made,  and  trained  with  a  new combined  data  matrix 
for  leukemia  cancer  classification.  However,  the  result 
of classification  was  not as  good as  expected.  (Data  are 
not  shown) 

Experimental  studies of  informative genes as ALL and 
AML  markers 
To  understand  the  scientific and  clinical  relevance  of 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification  23 

our  results,  a  PubMed  keyword  search  was  conducted 
using  gene  name  words,  such  as  'leukemia'  and  'acute 
leukemia'.  The  most  important  genes  found  have  also 
been  examined  in  the  related  contents. 

Table  1 shows  the  gene  list  selected  by multiplet-tests. 
TCF3  (M31523),  E2A  immunoglobulin  enhancer  binding 
factors  E12/E47,  is  associated  with  childhood  B cell  acute 
lymphoblastic  leukemia.  The  resulting  fusion  of  the  5' 
£24 sequences  with  the  3'  portions  of  other  genes  leads 
to  the  expression  of  two  well-characterized fusion 
proteins,  E2A-PBX1  and  E2A-HLF.  Since  the  E2A,  PBX1 
and  HLF  proteins  appears to  function  as  transcription 
factors,  it  appears  likely that  the oncogenic  fusions  appear 
to  function  in  development  by  causing  abnormal 

transcriptional  regulation  of  key target  genes  (LeBrun 
eta/.,  2003).  Fig.  2 (a)  shows  that  TCF3 is  differentially 
expressed  in  a training  sample  (p=0.013).  For  the  genes 
in  Table  2,  Parisi  eta!.  explored  new  therapeutic 
approaches  to  AML  focused  on  immune-based  therapy 
through  monoclonal  antibodies  that  target and  destroy 
malignant  cells  via  specific  cell  receptors  (Parisi  eta/., 
2002).  One  such  agent  is  gemtuzumab  (CAN-676),  an 
agent  that  targets  the  CD33 (M23197)  antigen  on  malignant 
myeloid  cells,  and  initial  studies  have  shown  significant 
anticancer activity.  In  another  study  (Hamann  eta/.,  2002), 
it  was  reported  that  CD33 is  expressed  by  AML  cell  in 
)80%  of  patients,  but  not  by normal  hematipoietic stem 
cells,  suggesting  that  eliminating  CD33(+)  cells  may  be 

Table  1.  Subset  of  genes  using  multiple  t  statistics 

Accession 

D26156 
L47738 
M11147 
M31211 
M31523 
M55150 
M92287 
S50223 
U05259 
U22376 

U50136 
U82759 
X59417 
X63469 
X74262 
X95735 
Z15115 

Symblo 

HLA-A 
CYFIP2 
FTL 
MLC1SA 
TCF3 
FAH 
CCND3 
ZNF22 
CD79A 
MYB 

LTC4S 
HOXA9 
PSMA6 
GTF2E2 
RBBP4 
ZYX 
TOP2B 

Gene  Annotation 

Transcriptional  activator  hSNF2b 
Inducible  protein  mRNA 
FTL  Ferritin,  light  polypeptide 
MYL  1 Myosin  light  chain  (alkali) 
TCF3  Transcription  factor  3  (E2A  immunoglobuling  enhancer  binding  factors  E12/E47) 
FAH  Fumarylacetoacetate 
CCND  3  Cycling  D3 
HKR-T1 
MB-1  gene 
C-myb  gene  extracted  from  Human  (c-myb)  gene,  complete  primary  CDs,  and  five  complete 
alternatively  spliced  CDs 
Leukotriene  C4  synthase  (LTC  4S)  gene 
GB  DEF  = Homeodomain  protein  HoxA9  mRNA 
PROTEASOME  IOTA  CHAIN 
GTF2E2  General  transcription  factor  TFIIE  beta  subunit,  34kD 
RETINOBLASTOMA  BINDING  PROTEIN  P48 
Zyxin 
TOP2B  Topoisomerase  (DNA}  II  beta  (180kD) 

Table  2.  Subset  of  genes  using  Prediction  Strength  (PS)  method 

Accession 

M16038 
M23197 
M27891 
M55150 
M84526 
M92287 
M90020 
U05259 
U22376 

U46751 
U50136 
U82759 
X17042 
X59417 
X95735 
Y00787 
Y12670 

Symblo 

LYN 
CD33 
CST3 
FAH 
DF 
CCND3 
AZU1 
CD79A 
MYB 

SQSTM1 
LTC4S 
HOXA9 
PRG1 
PSMA6 
ZYX 
IL8 
OBRGRP 

Gene  Annotation 

L YN  V-yes-1  Yamaguchi  sarcoma  viral  related  oncogene  homolog 
CD33  CD33  antigen  (differentiation  antigen) 
CST3  Cystatin  C  (amyloid  angiopathy  and  cerebral  hemorrhage) 
FAH  Fumarylacetoacetate 
DF  D component  of  complement  (adipsin) 
CCND3  Cyclin  D3 
Azurocidin  gene 
MB-1  gene 
C-myb  gene  extracted  from  Human  (c-myb}  gene,  complete  primary  CDs,  and  five  complete 
alternatively  spliced  CDs 
Phosphotyrosine  independent  ligand  p62  for  the  Lck  SH2  domain  mRNA 
Leukotriene  C4  synthase  (L TC4S)  gene 
GB  DEF  = Homeodomain  protein  HoxA9  mRNA 
PRG1  Proteoglycan  1,  secretory  granule 
PROTEASOME  IOTA  CHAIN 
Zyxin 
INTERLEUKIN-8  PRECURSOR 
LEPR  Leptin  receptor 

24  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

therapeutically  beneficial.  The  'leptin  receptor  gene -
related  protein'  (Y12670)  was  also found  in  the  'PS  method' 
gene  list  (Table  2).  Recently,  leptin  has  been  shown  to 
play a regulatory  role  for  differentiation  within  the  myeloid 
and  erythroid  cell  lineage.  The  research  on  whether  leptin 
plays  a  role  in  ALL  shows  that  the  leptin  levels  in  bone 
marrow-derived  plasma  of  children  with  ALL  were 
significantly  lower  than  in  those  of  healthy controls  (Wex 
et a!.,  2002). 

CCND3 (M92287),  CD79A  (U05259),  MYB (U22376), 
HOXA9 (U82759)  and  2YX (X95735)  are  common  in  two 
gene  lists,  but  are  not  in  the  'supervised  shaving'  list. 
For  those  genes  in  the two  common  methods,  Sonoki 
et at.  found  that  cyclin  D3  ( CCND3)  was  a target  gene 
of  mature  B cell  malignancies.  (Sonoki  et at.,  2001). 
Another  study (Krissansen  eta/.,  1986)  concluded  that 
glucocorticoids cause  GiG,  arrest of  lymphoid  cells  and, 
at  least  in  part,  to  a decrease  in  the  abundance of  the 
G1  progression  factor,  cyclin  D3,  which  manages 
regulation  of  the  cell  cycle.  The  mRNA encoding  cyclin 
D3  (CcnD3  mRNA)  was  rapidly  down  regulated  when 
dexamethasone was  added  to  P1798  murine T lymphoma 
cells. 

c-myb  is  essential 

CD79A  is  a cytoplasmic  antigen  that  acts  as a  mediator 
of  signal  transduction  from  the  cell  surface to  the 
cytoplasm  in  association  with  CD79b,  and  is  expressed 
early  in  8-cell development  (Lai  eta/.,  2000).  Frater  et 
al.  reported  that  CD79a has  been  so  clearly associated 
with  acute  lymphoblastic  leukemia  (ALL)  by  some 
researchers  that  its  expression  in  the  presence  of  blast 
markers  is  considered  indicative of  B-ALL (Frater  et at., 
2003).  From  Fig.  2(b)  this  report  could  be  true. 
the  development  of 
hematopoietic cells,  and  plays  a  role  in  proliferation, 
anti-apoptosis and  differentiation.  c-myb can  be 
activated  to transform  myeloid  cells,  either  by over 
expression  at  the  transcriptional  level  or  protein 
truncation,  which  removes  sequences  critical  for 
phosphorylation-induced 
and 
268-proteasome degradation  (Bies  eta/.,  1997,  1999). 
Cytogenetic,  genetic and  functional  studies  have 
demonstrated  a direct  link between  deregulated  Hoxa9 
expression  and  acute  myeloid  leukemia  (AML).  The 
leukemogenic  potential  of  Hoxa9  was  directly 
demonstrated  by the  development of  AML  in  mouse  bone 
marrow transplantation  chimeras  that  received  a  graft 

for 

ubiquitinization 

(a)"' 
~ 

(b) 

(c) 8 
\2 

~ 
~ 

(e) 

i 
I 

Fig.  2.  Gene expression  level  across the acute leukemia samples;  38  training  sets,  27 ALL  (white  bar) and  11  AML  (black  bar).  The 
first  row  of  panels (a),  (b)  and  (c)  correspond  to the  TCF3,  CD79A and  MPO genes.  Panel  (d),  the second  row of  the two  bar-plots 
represents  the  ILB transcripts,  M28130  and  Y00787.  Panel  (e),  the  last  row of  the  three  bare  plots corresponds  to  lysozyme  mRNA, 
J03801.  M19045  and  X14008. 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification  25 

of  primitive  hematopoietic  cells  engineered  by  retroviral 
gene transfer  to  over  express  Hoxa9 (Kroon  eta/.,  1998). 
In  Table  3 the  biologically  important  genes  obtained 
from  the  'supervised  shaving'  clustering  method  are  also 
shown.  The  enzyme  myeloperoxidase  (M19507)  is  a 
well-established  marker  of  myeloid  differentiation.  Most 
myeloid  leukemia  expresses  MPO enzyme  activity  at  the 
light  microscopic  level,  whereas  lymphoid  leukemia 
characteristically  lacks such  expression.  However,  the 
diagrostic significance of  MPO RNA or  inm.Jnohistochemically 
detectable  MPO protein  expressions  in  leukemic  blasts 
is  unclear.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  MPO expression 
shows  no  significant  correlation  with  other  markers  of 
myeloid  differentiation  (Austin  eta/.,  1998).  However,  Fig. 
2(c)  shows  MPO  was  over  expressed  in  acute  myeloid 
leukemia. 

The  chemokine  receptor  CXCR4 (L06797)  is  important 
on  acute  lymphoblastic  leukemia,  which  is  based  on  the 
research  about  stromal  cell-derived  factor  -1(SDF-t) 
inhibitor  (Juarez  eta/.,  2003).  SDF-1 is  a  key  regulator 
of  the  behavior of  normal  and  leukemic  precursor-S 
(pre-B)  cells.  It  is  possible  that  inhibiting  SDF-1 driven 
processes  in  pre-B acute  lymphoblastic  leukemia  (ALL) 
may  have therapeutic  implications.  SDF-1 and  CXCR4 
have  been  implicated  in  numerous  disease  state, 
including  cancer  metastasis,  cell  infiltration  into  arthritic 
joints  and  HIV  infection,  as  well  as  survival  and 
dissemination  of  leukemic  blasts. 

In  addition,  there  are  some  remarkable  points  in  the 
gene  list  shown  in  Table  3.  Some  transcripts  derived 
from  same  gene were found  in  the  list.  M28130  and  Y007frl 
are  mRNA transcripted  from  the  ILB (lnterleukin  8)  gene, 

leukemic 

which  are  detected  in  peripheral  leukemic  cells  obtained 
from  adult T -cell  leukemia  patients,  as  well  as  in  cultured 
human  T -cell  leukemia  virus  type 1-infected T cell  lines. 
Detection  of  IL -8 and  IL -BR might  help to  identify ALL 
types,  predict  prognosis  and  the  development of  CNSL, 
which  is  established  by  Liu  eta/.,  1999.  Another  example 
is  lysozyme,  which  has  J03801,  M19045  and  X14008  for 
transcripts.  The 
lymphoblasts  were 
characterized  by  low  levels  of  lysozyme,  as  compared 
to  by the  leukemic  myeloblasts or  normal  lymphocytes 
(Ho  eta!.,  1984).  It  is  worth  noting,  ILB or  Lysozyme 
transcripts  showed  similar  expression  patterns  across 
the  leukemia  samples  (Fig.  2).  It  means  that  this  transcript 
expression  is  reliable  and  samples  are  subdivided.  Such 
a phenomenon  was  not  found  in  the  other  gene  list  table. 
The  ferritin  related  genes,  FTH1  (L20941)  and  FTL 
(M11147),  are  shown  in  Table  3.  High  serum  ferritin  levels, 
without  any  correspondence to  the  amount  of  total  body 
iron  storage,  have  been  found  in  patients with  leukemia. 
Investigating  96  adults  with  different  types  of  leukemia, 
serum  ferritin  can  be used  as  a tumor  marker  in  myeloid. 
So,  the  serum  ferritin  concentration  must  be  valued  as 
a clinically  useful  tumor  marker  in  these types  of  leukemia, 
exhibiting  a  helpful  and  simple  parameter  in  monitoring 
the  activity  of  the  disease  (Aulbert  et a!.,  1985). 

Classification  using SVM  (Support  Vector  Machine) 
As  mentioned  above,  bone  marrow  or  peripheral  blood 
samples  from  72  patients  with  other acute  myeloid 
leukemia  (AML)  or acute  lymphoblastic  leukemia  (ALL) 
were  used  in  this  study.  The  data  was  split  into a training 
set  consisting  of  38  samples,  of  which  27  were  ALL  and 

Table  3.  Subset  of  genes  using  supervised  shaving 

Accession 

Symblo 

Gene  Annotation 

L19779 
L20941 
M11147 
M19507 
M27891 
M69043 
M96326 
X17042 
Y00433 
L06797 
X57351 
M28130 
Y00787 
J03801 
M19045 
X14008 
D32129 

HIST2H2AA 
FTH1 
FTL 
MPO 
CST3 
NFKBIA 
AZU1 
PRG1 
GPX1 
CXCR4 
IFITM2 
IL8 
IL8 
LYZ 
LYZ 
LYZ 
HLA-A 

Histone  H2A.  2  mRNA 
FTH1  Ferritin  heavy  chain 
FTL  Ferritin,  light  polypeptide 
MPO  Myeloperoxidase 
CST3  Cystatic  C  (amyloid  angiopathy  and  cerebral  hemorrhage) 
MAJOR  HISTO  COMPATIBILITY  COMPLEX  ENHANCER-BINDING  PROTEIN  MAD3 
Azurocidin  gene 
PRG1  Proteoglycan  1,  secretory  granule 
GPX1  Glutathione  peroxidase  1 
PROBABLE  G  PROTEIN-COUPLED  RECEPTOR  LCR1  HOMOLOG 
RPS3  Ribosomal  protein  83 
lnterleukin  8  (IL8)  gene 
INTERLEUKIN-8  PRECURSOR 
L YZ  Lysozyme 
L YZ  Lysozyme 
Lysozyme  gene  (EC  3.2.1.17) 
HLA-A  MHC  class  I  protein  HLA-A  (HLA-A28,  -B40,  -Cw3) 

26  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

11  AML,  and  a  test  set  of  34  samples,  20  ALL  and  14 
AML.  The  prediction  on  the training  set  using  SVM  is 
shown  in  Table  4. 

In  Table  4,  in  the top-left and  bottom-right are correctly 
predicted  leukemia type  numbers and  in  the top-right 
and  bottom-left are the  misclassified  cases,  such  as ALL 

incorrectly classified  into  AML or the  reverse.  Table  4(a) 
is the  result  of  prediction  using  filtering  processed  data 
with  3051  genes,  and  is the  worst  among  the  results 
that  meet  our expectation.  The  result  accuracy was  67%. 
Tables  4(b),  (c)  and  (d)  represent  the  results  of  the 
predictions  using  the  multiple t-test,  'supervised  shaving' 

Table 4.  Prediction  of  the training  set  using  SVM.  (a)  is  with  a  raw  data set  without  gene selection  processing.  (b)  to 
(d)  correspond  to  multiple  t  statistics,  supervised  shaving  and  Prediction  Strength  method,  respectively. 

(a) 

SVM 
Prediction 

ALL 

AML 

ALL 

AML 

20 

0 

11 

3 

(c) 

SVM 
Prediction 

ALL 

AML 

ALL 

AML 

20 

0 

2 

12 

(a)  ~ 

T 

(b) 

SVM 
Prediction 

ALL 

AML 

ALL 

AML 

20 

0 

5 

9 

(d) 

SVM 
Prediction 

ALL 

AML 

ALL 

AML 

20 

0 

13 

' 

I 

0 

0 

>I)  T 

T 
I 

1 

Q~~~~oQ6o6;g~~~B~ ... ~.!~;~~·~ 

0 

Q 

5 

10 

15 

211 

25 

(b)  8 
8 

(c)  ~ 

'  T 
'  ' 

:  0  0 

\) 

5 

10 

15 

211 

25 

30 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

~ 
~ 

Fig,  3.  Gene expression  data  distribution  of acute  leukemia samples;  38  training  sets,  Zl ALL  (white  box),  11  AML  (gray  box),  represented 
by  box-plot.  Panel  (a)  represents the  new  data  matrix with  subsets  of  genes selected  by  multiple t statistics.  Panels  (b)  and  (c)  are 
Golub'  s 

'Prediction  Strength'  and 

results,  respectively. 

'Supervised  shaving' 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification  27 

and  PS  method,  respectively.  The  prediction  accuracy 
with  'Supervised  Shaving'  was  94%  and  with  the  PS 
method  was  97%,  which  were  better  than  the  result  of 
the  multiple t-test,  which  was  85%.  It  was  also  found 
that  the ALL type was  correctly  class~ied in  all  the  methods, 
but  the  AML type  depended  on  the  gene selection  method. 
AML  patient  number '31'  in  the  test  data  was  misclassified 
as  ALL  in  all  the  SVM  tests.  As  shown  in  box  plots  (Fig. 
3),  AML  patient  sample  number  '31'  tended  to  a  have 
low expression  level  compare  to  the  other  AML  patients 
samples  in  all  three  different  data  representation. 
Therefore,  we  suppose that  this  AML  sample  is  not  general 
in  all  AML  or other  leukemia  types,  and  such  a sample 
has  an  effect  on  the  misclassification  and  incorrect  result. 

Discussion 
Simultaneously  monitoring  the  expression  of  thousands 
of  genes  holds  great  promise  for  better  understanding 
cancer  biology  and  developing  accurate  tumor 
classification  schemes.  However,  the  very  large amount 
of  gene expression  information  provided  by contemporary 
microarray technology causes  problems  for  both  basic 
research  and  clinical  application.  The  high  cost  of 
large-scale  microarray  experiments  lead  to  a  sample 
size  that  is  usually several  orders of  magnitude  smaller 
than  the  number  of  genes  being  monitored.  As  a  result, 
it  is  mathematically  infeasible  to  use  all  the  gene 
expression  information  to  develop  a  classification 
algorithm  for  a  relatively  small  number  of  tumors.  It  also 
well  documented  in  the  statistical  literature that  too  many 
feature  variable  genes  could  harm  the  performance of 
the  classifier.  Therefore,  development  of  an  accurate 
tumor  classification  scheme  must  begin  with  selection 
of  a  subset  of  the  initially  observed  genes for  tumor 
classification. 

To  determine the  sets  of  biologically  meaningful  genes, 
the  available  expression  data  from  6817  genes  in  47  ALL 
and  25  AML  samples  were  analyzed,  and  three  different 
methods  used  to  select  subsets  of  genes.  The  PCA based 
'supervised  shaving'  method  was  identified  to  produce 
subsets  of  genes  that  were  more  leukemia  related  than 
other  methods,  and  the  expression  pattern  of  some  genes 
were  correlated  to  each  other  because the  transcripts 
came  from  the  same  gene  (Rg.  2(d),  (e)).  The  'supervised 
shaving'  method  uses  information  about  the  columns  to 
'supervise'  the  shaving  of  rows.  In  this  case,  leukemia 
type  class  labels  were  used,  and  supervised  shaving 
maximizes  a weighted  combination  of  the  column  variance 
using  the  information.  So,  most  genes  have  a  higher 
variance  between  two  samples  than  other  subsets  of 
genes.  Because  the  'supervised  shaving'  method 

identifies  subsets  of  genes  with  coherent  expression 
patterns  and  a  large  variance  across  samples,  it  may 
not  find  non-coherent  genes,  but  that  have  a significant 
difference  between  two  samples.  However,  most  genes 
are  very  important  from  a  biological  and  clinical  point 
of  view,  and  show good  performance  in  classification. 
In  the  same  manner,  the  PS  method  also  produces  high 
accuracy  in  classification,  but  a  genes'  composition  is 
dissimilar  to  that  of  the  supervised  shaving  gene,  and 
some  ideas  may  be  suggested  by such  a different  gene 
selection  method. 

First,  for  investigations  involving  a  large  number of 
observed  variables,  ~ is  often  useful  to simplify the  analysis 
by considering  a smaller  number  of  linear  combinations 
of  the  original  variable.  In  this  case,  gene expression 
data 
consist  of  a  number  of  microarray 
experiment(samples)  in  thousands  of  genes.  To  identify 
differentially expressed  genes,  the  multiple  t-test and 
PS  method  frequently  reduce  the  intensity from  all  gene 
expressions  to  a  single  mean  value that  corresponds 
to  a  sample  group.  This  process  may  be  inadequate 
to  understand  data  representation  and  depends  on  the 
data  ~self.  On  the  other  hand,  PCA  based  methods  reduce 
the  dimensionality of  a data  set,  while  retaining  as  much 
information  as  possible.  So,  the  result  may  be affected 
by the  difference  of  cell  lines  in  the  same  sample  group. 
Second,  deciding  on  the  number  of  informative  genes 
is  a  problem.  All  of  the  three  compared  methods  have 
this  problem.  In  the  case  of  'supervised  shaving'  method, 
the  cluster  number  is  a case  in  point.  In  this  report,  the 
cluster  number  was  fixed  as  two,  and  corresponded  to 
17  genes.  However,  the  investigator  should  decide the 
cut-off value  for  selecting  genes  in  the  multiple t-test 
and  PS  method.  In  order  to  do justice to the  gene  number, 
other  methods also  produce  the  17  top  ranked  genes. 
However,  only 2 or  3 genes  can  achieve  more  than  90% 
accuracy of  classification.  This  result  implies that  a small 
number of  selected  genes  may  be  used  as  biomarkers 
for  tumor  classification,  or  may  have  some  relevance 
in  tumor  development,  and  serve  as  a  potential  drug 
target  (Xiong  eta!.,  2001). 

In  conclusion,  there  is  no  general  method  to  select 
the  right  informative  gene,  but  the  PCA  based  method 
'supervised  shaving'  gives  biologically and  clinically 
meaningful  genes.  There  is  no  single  best  procedure 
for  selecting  an  optimal  subset  of  genes.  It  was  not  the 
purpose  of  this  paper  to  find  the  optimum  methods  for 
gene  selection,  but  rather  to  illustrate  how gene  selection 
can  be  useful  to  cancer classification  using  microarray 
gene expression  data  classification.  In  this  report,  three 
statistical  procedures  were  compared  for  their  accuracy 
of  cancer  classification:  multiple  t tests,  the  PS  statistic 

28  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  19-29,  March  2004 

suggested  by Golub  eta!.  and  'supervised  shaving'.  The 
result  indicates the  PS  method  and  'supervised  shaving' 
methods  performed  similarly,  and  both  methods 
performed  better  than  the  t  statistics.  However,  the 
'supervised  shaving'  method  demands  much  more 
computational  time  than  the  PS  method. 

An  attempt  to  use  the  'supervised  shaving'  clustering 
algorithm  to  select  informative genes  suggests  the  use 
of  the  clustering  method  as  a  gene selection  method. 
The  level  of  expressions  of  sets(clusters)  of  genes  across 
samples  correlate.  As  a  result,  it  is  likely that  a smaller 
number  without  significant  loss  of  information  can  capture 
the  information  contained  in  all  large  numbers  of  genes. 
This  is  a  direct  result  of  the  fact  that  sets  of  genes  are 
similarly  regulated  and,  hence,  play  a similar  role  in  cancer 
classification.  It  is  known  from  pattern  recognition  theory 
that  a  good  feature  subset  is  one  that  contains  features 
highly correlated  with  the  class,  yet  uncorrelated  with 
each  other.  In  this  report,  it  has  been  shown  that  a number 
of  gene  clusters  are obtained  from  the  'supervised 
shaving'  method.  The  expression  levels of  genes within 
the  same  cluster  have  high  correlation,  and  the  expression 
levels  of  genes  in  different  clusters  have  low correlation. 
It  is  speculated  that  the  genes  within  a  cluster  lie  in  a 
single  or  co-regulated  pathway,  and  genes  in  different 
clusters  lie  in  different  pathways  or  in  pathways  that  are 
not  co-regulated.  So,  the  progress  of  a clustering  method 
to  select  informative  coherent  genes  is  needed  for  cancer 
classifications. 

Acknowledgement 
This  study  was  supported  by a grant  from  the  International 
Mobile  Telecommunications  2000  R&D  Project,  Ministry 
of  Information  and  Communication,  Republic  of  Korea 
( 01-PJ11-PG9-01 BTOOA-0020). 

References 
Alizadeh,  A.  A.,  Eisen,  M.  B.,  Davis,  R.  E.,  Ma,  C.,  Lassos,  I.  S., 
Rosenwald,  A.,  Boldrick,  J.  C.,  Sabel,  H.,  Tran,  T.,  Yu,  X.,  Powell, 
J.  1.,  Yang,  L.,  Marti,  G.  E.,  Moore,  T.,  Hudson,  J.,  Jr.,  Lu,  L., 
Lewis,  D.  B.,  Tibshirani,  R.,  Sherlock,  G.,  Chan,  W.  C.,  Greiner, 
T.  C.,  Weisenburger,  D.  D.,  Armitage,  J.  0., Warnke,  R.,  Levy, 
R.,  Wilson,  W.,  Grever,  M.  R.,  Byrd,  J.  C.,  Botstein,  D.,  Brown, 
P.  0.,  and  Staudt,  L.  M.  (2000).  Distinct  types  of  diffuse  large 
B-cell  lymphoma  identified  by gene  expression  profiling.  Nature 
403,  503-511. 

Alon,  U.,  Barkai,  N.,  Notterman,  D.  A.,  Gish,  K.,  Ybarra,  S.,  Mack, 
D.,  and  Levine,  A.  J.  (1999).  Broad  patterns  of  gene  expression 
revealed  by clustering  analysis  of  tumor  and  normal  colon  tissues 
probed  by  oligonucleotide  arrays.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
96,  6745-6750. 

Aulbert,  E.  and  Schmidt,  C.  G.  (1985).  Ferritin--a tumor  marker 

in  myeloid  leukemia.  Cancer Detect.  Prev.  8,  297-302. 
Bies,  J.,  Nazarov,  V.,  and  Wolff,  L.  (1999).  Identification  of  protein 
instability determinants  in  the  carboxy-terminal  region  of  c-Myb 
removed  as  a  result of  retroviral  integration  in  murine  monocytic 
leukemias.  J.  Viral.  73,  2038-2044. 

Bies,  J.  and  Wolff,  L.  (1997).  Oncogenic activation  of c-Myb  by 
carboxyl-terminal  truncation  leads to decreased  proteolysis  by 
the  ubiquitin-268  proteasome  pathway.  Oncogene 14,  203-212. 
Brown,  M.  P.,  Grundy,  W.  N.,  Lin,  D.,  Cristianini,  N.,  Sugnet,  C. 
W.,  Furey,  T.  S.,  Ares,  M.,  Jr.,  and  Haussler,  D.  (2000). 
Knowledge-based  analysis of  microarray  gene  expression  data 
by  using  support  vector  machines.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA. 
97'  262-267., 

Frater,  J.  L.,  Yaseen,  N.  R.,  Peterson,  L.  C.,  Tallman,  M.  S.,  and 
Goolsby,  C.  L.  {2003).  Biphenotypic acute  leukemia with 
coexpression  of  CD79a  and  markers  of  myeloid  lineage.  Arch. 
Pathol.  Lab  Med.  127,  356-359. 

Furey,  T.  S.,  Cristianini,  N.,  Duffy,  N.,  Bednarski,  D.  W.,  Schummer, 
M.,  and  Haussler,  D.  (2000).  Support  vector  machine 
classification  and  validation  of  cancer  tissue  samples  using 
microarray  expression  data.  Bioinformatics 16,  906-914. 
Golub,  T.  R.,  Slonim,  D.  K.,  Tamayo,  P.,  Huard,  C.,  Gaasenbeek, 
M.,  Mesirov,  J.  P.,  Coller,  H.,  Loh,  M.  L.,  Downing,  J.  R.,  Caligiuri, 
M.  A.,  Bloomfield,  C.  D.,  and  Lander,  E.  S.  (1999).  Molecular 
classification  of  cancer:  class  discovery and  class  prediction 
by  gene  expression  monitoring.  Science  286,  531-537. 
Hamann,  P.  R.,  Hinman,  L.  M.,  Hollander,  I.,  Beyer,  C.  F.,  Lindh, 
D.,  Holcomb,  R.,  Hallett,  W.,  Tsou,  H.  R.,  Upeslacis,  J.,  Shochat, 
D.,  Mountain,  A.,  Flowers,  D.  A.,  and  Bernstein,  I.  (2002). 
Gemtuzumab  ozogamicin,  a  potent  and  selective anti-CD33 
antibody-calicheamicin  conjugate  for  treatment  of  acute  myeloid 
leukemia.  Bioconjug.  Chem.  13,  47-58. 

Hastie,  T.,  Tibshirani,  R.,  Eisen,  M.  B.,  Alizadeh,  A.,  Levy,  R.,  Staudt, 
L,  Chan,  W.  C.,  Botstein,  D.,  and  Brown,  P.  (2000).  'Gene shaving' 
as  a  method  for  identifying  distinct  sets  of  genes  with  similar 
expression  patterns.  Genome  Bioi.  1,  RESEARCH0003. 
Ho,  A.  D.,  Rehn,  W.,  and  Hunstein,  W.  (1984).  Plasma and  intracellular 
levels  of  lactate  dehydrogenase,  phosphohexose  isomerase  and 
lysozyme  activity  in  acute  leukemia.  8/ut.  49,  19-28. 

Juarez,  J.,  Bradstock,  K.  F.,  Gottlieb,  D.  J.,  and  Bendall,  L  J.  (2003). 
Effects  of  inhibitors of  the  chemokine  receptor  CXCR4  on  acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia  cells  in  vitro.  Leukemia 17,  1294-1300. 
Kroon,  E.,  Krosl,  J.,  Thorsteinsdottir,  U.,  Baban,  S.,  Buchberg,  A. 
M.,  and  Sauvageau,  G.  (1998).  Hoxa9  transforms  primary  bone 
marrow  cells  through  specific collaboration  with  Meis1a  but  not 
Pbx1b.  Embo  J.  17,  3714-3725. 

Lai,  R.,  Juco,  J.,  Lee,  S.  F.,  Nahirniak,  S.,  and  Etches,  W.  S.  (2000). 
Flow  cytometric  detection  of  CD79a  expression  in  T -cell  acute 
lymphoblastic  leukemias.  Am.  J.  Clin.  Pathol.  113,  823-830. 
LeBrun,  D.  P.  (2003).  E2A  basic  helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors  in  human  leukemia.  Front.  Biosci.  8,  s206-222. 
Liu,  J.,  Zeng,  H.,  and  Zhang,  Y.  (1999).  [Study  on  the  expression 
of  interleukin-8 and  its  receptors  in  acute  leukemia].  Zhonghua 
Xue  Ye  Xue  Za  Zhi 20,  24-26. 

Parisi,  E.,  Draznin,  J.,  Stoopler,  E.,  Schuster,  S.  J.,  Porter,  D.,  and 
Sollecito,  T.  P.  (2002).  Acute  myelogenous  leukemia:  advances 
and  limitations  of  treatment.  Oral Surg.  Oral Med.  Oral Pathol. 
Oral  Radio!.  Endod.  93,  257-263. 

Perou,  C.  M.,  Jeffrey,  S.  S.,  van  de  Rijn,  M.,  Rees,  C.  A.,  Eisen, 
M.  B.,  Ross,  D.  T.,  Pergamenschikov,  A.,  Williams,  C.  F.,  Zhu, 
S.  X ..  Lee.  J.  C ..  Lashkari.  D ..  Shalon.  D .•  Brown,  P.  0.,  and 

Informative  Gene  Selection  Method  in  Tumor  Classification  29 

Botstein,  D.  (1999).  Distinctive  gene expression  patterns  in  human 
mammary epithelial  cells and  breast  cancers.  Proc.  Nat!.  Acad. 
Sci.  USA  96,  9212-9217. 

Sonoki,  T.,  Harder,  L.,  Horsman,  D.  E.,  Karran,  L.,  Taniguchi,  1., 
Willis,  T.  G.,  Gesk,  S.,  Steinemann,  D.,  Zucca,  E.,  Schlegelberger, 
B.,  Sole,  F.,  Mungall,  A.  J.,  Gascoyne,  R.  D.,  Siebert,  R.,  and 
Dyer,  M.  J.  (2001).  Cyclin  D3  is  a target  gene of 1(6;14Xp21.1;q32.3) 
of  mature  B-cell  malignancies.  Blood 98,  2837-2844. 

Wex,  H.,  Ponelis,  E.,  Wex,  T.,  Dressendorfer,  R.,  Mittler,  U.,  and 
Vorwerk,  P.  (2002).  Plasma  leptin  and  leptin  receptor  expression 
in  childhood  acute  lymphoblastic  leukemia.  Int.  J.  Hematol.  76, 
446-452. 

Xiong,  M.,  U,  W.,  Zhao,  J.,  Jin,  L,  and  Boerwinkle,  E.  (2001).  Feature 
(gene)  selection  in  gene expression-based  tumor  classification. 
Mol.  Genet.  Metab.  73,  239-247. 

