Rapid Communication Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  53-56,  March  2004 

DNA  Microarrays  for  Comparative  Genomics: 
Identification  of  Conserved  and  Variable  Sequences 
in  Prokaryotic  Genomes 

Jae-Chang  Cho* 

Institute of  Environmental  Sciences  and  Department  of 
Environmental  Sciences,  Hankuk  University  of  Foreign 
Studies,  Yongin,  Korea 

Keywords: DNA  microarray,  comparative  genomics 

Introduction 
the  authority  on  described 
Bergey's  manual, 
microorganisms,  lists  several  thousands  bacterial  species 
(http://www.cme.  msu.edu/bergeys/),  and  analyses  on 
the  DNAs  extracted  from  natural  environments  indicate 
there  may  be  at  least  10,000  species  per  one  gram  of 
soil  (Torsvik  eta!.,  1990)  and  most  of  them  are  not 
characterized  yet.  Only  a  few  bacterial  genome 
sequences  are  currently available,  and  it  is  practically 
impossible to  sequence whole  genomes of  all  bacterial 
species  on  this  planet.  One  of  the  key  issues  in 
microbiology is  how  to  characterize  and  compare those 
extremely  diverse  prokaryotic  genomes.  This  is 
particularly  important  for  finding  and  characterizing  new 
microorganisms  for  diverse  purposes,  from  environmental 
remediation  to  pharmaceutical  discovery. 

Comparative  genomics  of  bacteria  starts  from 
measuring  genetic or  taxonomic  distances  between 
genomes  of  interest.  The  dissimilarities  between  the 
genomes  are  the  consequences  of  evolutionary 
diversification,  and  the  prokaryotic  evolutionary 
relationships  have  been  mostly  derived  from  sequence 
comparisons  among  16S  ribosomal  RNA  genes  (Woese, 
1987;  Olsen  et a/.,  1994),  although  other  conserved  genes 
such  as  RNA  polymerase  gene (rpo),  and  DNA  gyrase 
gene (gyt} are  frequently  used.  However,  the  phylogenetic 
reconstruction  employing  similarity  assessments of  the 
aligned  homologous  genes  or  regions  are  likely to  be 
biased.  Different  genes are  under  different types  and 
intensities of  selection  pressures,  hence the  phylogenies 
based  on  different  genes frequently  shows  incongruence. 
Difficulties  intrinsic to  the  conventional  approaches 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail:  choje@huls.ac.kr, 

Tel  +82-31-330-4350,  Fax  +82-31-330-4529 
Accepted  8  March  2004 

summarized  by  Karlin  and  Mrazek  (1999)  include: 
alignments  of  distantly  related  sequences  and  very  long 
sequences  (e.g.,  genome  sequences)  are  generally  not 
feasible;  different  phylogenetic  reconstruction  may  result 
for  the  same set  of  organisms  based  on  analysis  of  different 
protein  and  gene,  although  attempts  are  made  to 
overcome  this  by averaging  over  many genes  or  proteins; 
resultant  trees  may  be dependent on  details  of  the 
alignment  algorithm  employed,  and often  assume  the 
constant  rates  of  evolution  on  the  various  branches,  which 
may  be  violated. 

In  contrast  to  single  gene  phylogeny-based 
approaches,  whole  genomic  DNA-DNA  hybridization 
method  evaluates  overall  similarity  between  test 
genomes,  and  is  adopted  as  the  current  official  method 
for  bacterial  species  determination  (Wayne  eta/.,  1987). 
While  the  sequence  analyses of  one  or  several  genes 
sample  only  (  1/1000 of  the  genome,  the  whole  genomic 
DNA-DNA similarity  reflects  the  overall  differences 
between  genomes  tested,  and  provides  more  robust, 
at  least  not-biased,  estimates  for  the  taxonomic  distances 
as  well  as  genetic similarities  between  the  genomes. 
However,  in  spite  of  the  straightforward  nature of  the 
whole  genomic  DNA-DNA hybridization  method,  the 
method  is  not  popularly  used,  since this  method  needs 
laborious cross-hybridizations  to  find  the  similarity 
relationships  between  test  genomes  (organisms). 
Moreover,  the  method  cannot work when  applied  to 
analyze  previously  uncharacterized  genomes  (e.g., 
genomes  of  environmental  isolates),  because  we  cannot 
select  appropriate  reference  genomes to  be used  for 
the cross-hybridizations.  Among  others,  a fatal  drawback 
of  the  method  when  applied  to  comparative  genomics 
is  that  it  gives  us only single  numerical  value  (e.g.,  70% 
similarity).  The  value  reflects  the  average similarity,  but 
all  other  information  is  concealed  in  this  single  number. 

Microarrays  for  comparative  genomics 

DNA  microarrays  have  been  widely  used  for  functional 
genomics  to  evaluate  gene  expression  by competitive 
hybridizations  between  different  populations  of  mRNA 
expressed  under  different  culture  conditions.  The  relative 
extents  of  hybridizations of  target  mRNAs  to  probes on 
the  microarray  provide  information  on  the  degree of 
expression.  Recently  several  research  groups applied 

54  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  53-56,  March  2004 

the  DNA  microarray-based  approach  to other  fields,  such 
as  SNP  (single  nucleotide  polymorphism)  and  mutation 
detection  (Hacia  eta/.,  1999;  Gerry  eta/.,  1999),  genetic 
linkage  analysis and  population  genetics  (Chakravarti, 
1999),  gene  titration  (Cho  and  Tiedje,  2002),  and 
comparative  genomics  (Behr  eta/.,  1999;  Cho  and  Tiedje, 
2001;  Murray  eta!.,  2001). 

DNA  microarrays can  be applied  to  the comparative 
genomics with  experimental  designs  similar  to those  used 
in  functional  genomics,  and  eliminate  the  above 
disadvantages of  conventional  methods.  Whole  genomic 
DNA-DNA similarity  can  be estimated  from  the  similarity 
coefficients  calculated  from  DNA  microarray hybridization 
patterns.  In  the  study of  DNA  microarrays  fabricated  with 
genome fragments  from  fluorescent  Pseudomonas spp. 
(Cho  and  Tiedje,  2001),  regression  analysis  showed  a 
good  agreement  between  DNA-DNA reassociation 
values  and  the  microarray  hybridization  pattern 
similarities.  The  coefficient  of  determination  (r2
)  was  ca. 
0.7,  and  order  1 of  linear  relationship  with  the  regression 
coefficient  of  0.7  (slope)  indicated  that  the  microarray 
method  is  similar  in  resolution  to  the  whole  genomic 
DNA-DNA hybridization  method.  The  microarray  method 
showed  the  linearity over a  broader  span  of  DNA similarity 
values  (50  to  100%)  but  provided  slightly  less  resolution 
at  )70%  DNA  similarity  values  than  for  REP-PCR 
fingerprinting  method  (Rademaker,  2000).  The 
microarray method,  however,  could  distinguish  closely 
related  genomes and,  more  importantly,  provided 
resolution  over the  gap between  REP-PCR fingerprinting 
and  16S  rRNA  gene analysis  (Cho  and  Tiedje,  2000). 
Cluster  analysis  can  be  performed  on  the  hybridization 
patterns  of  spotted  DNA  probes  across  all  test  genomes. 
In  a  gene  expression  data  analysis,  clusters  indicate  that 
the  genes  belonging  to  each  cluster  tend  to  turn  on  and 
off  simultaneously,  but  the  grouping  for  the  comparative 
genomics  indicates  only that  the  hybridization  patterns 
of  the  cluster  members  are  similar  to  a  certain  degree. 
If  the  spotted  DNAs  on  the  array  form  such  a  cluster, 
it  suggests  but  does  not  confirm  conserved  or variable 
sequences. 

Evenness  index 

Identification  of  conserved  and  variable  sequences  can 
be  achieved  by characterizing  the  shape  of  hybridization 
signal  distribution  with  evenness  index (Cho  and  Tiedje, 
2001).  The  evenness  (E)  value of  each  spotted  DNA 
sequence,  standardized  entropy,  is  calculated  based  on 
information  theory  (Pielou,  1966;  Legendre and  Legendre, 
1998)  using  E= (- ~P log  p)/log  q,  where pis the 
relative  proportion  of  log-normalized  hybridization  signal 
ratio  (RJ  and  q  is  the  total  number  of  hybridizations 

performed  (the  number  of  test  genomes).  Since the 
distribution  of  the  E values  can  be  highly skewed 
(skewness = -o.86 for  Pseudomonas spp.),  the  E values 
should  be  normalized.  The  arc cosine-transformed 
evenness  value,  ()  £,  is  used  to  represent  the  degree 
of  conservation  of  each  probe sequence.  Fig.  1 describes 
the  inherent  characteristics of  the evenness angle.  If  a 
spotted  DNA fragment  is  extremely  conserved  in  all  test 
genomes  (e.g.,  rRNA  genes),  the angle (e  £}  would  show 
its  minimum  value  (0°).  It  is  noteworthy that  the  variable 
and  conserved  sequences cannot  be  reliably  identified 
by cluster  analysis,  but  are easily  revealed  by e E values. 
DNA fragments showing  a  small  angle  (high  evenness) 
tend  to  show  high  hybridization  signal  ratio with  low 
standard  deviation,  indicating  that  they  show as  high 
a  hybridization  signal  as  many  genomes tested  and  hence 
can  be  considered  conserved  sequences.  In  contrast, 
DNA  sequences  showing  a  large angle  (low evenness) 
tend  to  show  low average signal  ratio  with  high  standard 
deviation,  indicating  that  they  show  appreciable 
hybridization signal  only to the  very  closely  related 
genomes  and  hence  can  be  considered  variable 
sequences  (Fig.  1 and  2).  The  average angle  (()  £)  of 
the  genome  fragments  sampled  from  fluorescent 
Pseudomonas spp.  was 35"  (Cho  and  Tiedje,  2001).  DNA 
fragments  with  ()  E values  lower  than  1 standard  deviation 
(SD)  below the  mean  showed  appreciable  hybridization 
signal  (R  )  1)  for  the  genomes  from  strains  of  wide 
taxonomic  range,  and  DNA  fragments  with  ()  E  values 
of  1 SD  above the  mean  showed  appreciable  hybridization 
only when  hybridized  to  the  reference  strain.  Recent 
studies on  the  genomes  of  world-wide collection  of 
Pseudomonas fluorescens strains  using  the  evenness 
index  identified  conserved  sequences  involved  in 
information  storage  and  processing,  cellular  process  and 
metabolism.  The  calculated  similarities  between  those 
sequences  and  their corresponding  GenBank  matches 
were about  85  "" 90%  with  nucleotide  diversity (II)  ranging 
from  15  "" 22.  The  study also  revealed  that  15%  of 
Pseudomonas fluorescent genomes  were  highly variable 
sequences  (data  not  shown). 

D,/tan(fl > as  genome-wide  genetic  distance 

Using  the  calculated  ()  E values,  we  can  also  construct 
a  relationship  between  ()  E  value and  taxonomic  distance 
of  genome  (Fig.  2),  where  valley-shaped  regions  could 
be caused  by selection  pressure,  resulting  in  subsequent 
speciation  events.  The  genome  fragments  with  low ()  E 
values  have  almost  identical  sequences  and  are 
distributed  over a  wide  taxonomic  range,  while the 
fragments  with  high  ()  E  values  are distributed  over  a 
narrow taxonomic  range.  When  empirical  results  by Cho 

DNA  Microarrays  for  Comparative  Genomics  55 

Zone ofvalid information~) 

A 
g: 
1i'l 
1: 
Cl 
i:i5 
1: 
0 
~ 
N 
'5 
"I: 
~ 
I 

100 

Sequence Similarity (S) 

Range of resolution (R) 

8 

g: 
1i'l 
1: 
Cl 
i:i5 
1: 
0 
~ 
N 
'5 
"1: 
~ 
I 

Taxonomic Continuum 

Fig.  3.  Zone  of  valid  information  (A)  and  resolution  range  (B)  of 
oligonucleotide  probe-based  (green  line)  and  DNA  fragment 
probe-based  (red  line)  microarrays. 

fragments 

they  can  be  other  DNA 

Oligonucleotide-based  arrays  vs  PCR 
product-based  arrays 
The  genetic  content  of  microarray  resides  in  the 
immobilized  nucleic  acid  sequences  on 
the 
microarray,  and  the  identity  of  these  sequences 
determines  what  information  can  be  obtained  from 
microarray  experiments.  These  nucleic  acids  can 
be  synthesized  directly 
(or  deposited  after 
syntheses)  on  the  microarray (e.g.,  oligonucleotides) 
or 
(e.g., 
PCR-products and  purified  eDNA  clones),  which  are 
mechanically deposited  on  the  array  substrata.  The 
length  of  oligonucleotides  varies  between  20  to  70 
nucleotides  (Li  et at.,  2001)  depending  on  the  source 
of  oligonucleotide  content,  and  the  oligonucleotide 
probes  have  benefits  over  DNA  fragment  probes: 
different  parts  of  the  same  gene  can  be  represented 
on  the  array,  which  enables  a  more  robust  design 
of  array  experiments;  oligonucleotide  probes  offer 
precise  control  over  the  genetic  composition  on 
the  array.  DNA  fragments  probes  include  libraries 
of  eDNA  clones,  expressed  sequence  tags  (ESTs), 
and  PeR-amplified  fragments  corresponding  to 
open  reading  frames  (ORFs)  in  genomic  DNA, 
and  the  optimal  length  for  DNA  fragment  probes 

90 

Standard  Deviation  ° 

Fig. 1.  Evenness  value  (e  E)  scatter  diagram,  with  average  and 
SD  of  log  hybridization  signal  ratio. 

Taxonomic Continuum 

Fig.  2.  Proposed  relationship  between e E value  and  genetic 
distance  in  taxonomic continuum.  Taxonomic  is  multidimensional, 
and  hence,  genetic similarity  peaks  could  also  be a  multidimensional 
structure,  but  diagram  is  drawn  as  shown  (three-dimensional) 
for convenience.  Dotted  lines  indicate  the  degree of  conservation 
of  sequences  with  different e E  values. 

and  Tiedje  (2001)  were  applied  to  this  diagram,  the 
degree  of  conservation  within  strain  level,  species 
level,  closely  related  species  level,  and  genus  level 
correspond  roughly  to  e E  values  of  )50°,  50°  to 
20°,  20°  to  10°,  and  (10°,  respectively.  Additionally, 
an  alternative  genetic  (or  taxonomic)  distance  [D!/tan 
<e  >l  can  be  calculated  {D!/tan{e  > = 1/[tan(e  E)]}.  The 
range of e E  values  for  Pseudomonas species  resulted 
in  a  Di!tarl...e  > of  ca.  2.7,  indicating  a  radius  of  taxonomic 
range  for  a  species.  This  alternative to  calculating 
genetic  distance  by  using  genome-wide  analyses 
may  be  useful  for  delineating  species,  although  the 
values  would  be  expected  to  vary  with  microbial 
groups. 

56  Genomics  &  Informatics  Vol.  2(1)  53-56,  March  2004 

require 

that  many  of 

functional  genomics.  However,  when 

is  between  500  to  1,000  nucleotides.  Examination 
of  potential  cross  hybridization  between  related 
sequences,  such  as  those  derived  from  a  gene 
family,  has  revealed  that  ORF-type  probes  could 
not  distinguish  target  DNAs  with  )  80%  sequence 
similarities.  Despite the  above  differences  between 
oligonucleotide  probes  and  DNA  fragments  probes, 
both  give  reliable  results  and  are  popularly  used 
in 
the 
microarrays  are applied to comparative  genomics, 
there 
is  a  noteworthy  differences  between 
oligonucleotide  probes and  DNA  fragments  probes 
in  terms  of  the  amount  of  underlying  information. 
The  oligonucleotide  microarrays  could  be  problematic 
in  comparative  genomics  because of the  high  specificity, 
which  distinguishes  perfect  matches  from  even  one-base 
mismatches.  Positive  matches  between  genomes of  under 
comparative  genomics study (i.e.,  not  identical,  but closely 
related  genomes) 
the 
oligonucleotides are  identical  within  each  gene's  set  of 
oligonucleotide  probes.  Since  it  is  unlike that  several 
stretches  of  20-base  perfect  matches  exist  for  most  genes 
in  the  different genomes,  the oligonucleotide  microarray 
may  give  many  false  negatives  compared  to  the 
microarrays fabricated  with  longer  DNA fragments  such 
as ORF arrays that do rot  depend  on  such  perfect  matches 
(Dong  eta/.,  2001).  When  calculating  similarity and 
correlation  coefficients,  comparisons  of  matrices  with  full 
of  negatives or  near  zero values cause  the  calculated 
statistics  to  be  insignificant,  and  following  analyses  may 
be 
from 
oligonucleotide  probes  tend  to be all-or-none like,  the 
extents  of  hybridization  signals from  ORF-type  probes 
tend  to  be  progressive  according  to  the similarities 
between  probe  and  target  sequences  (Rg.  3).  Assuming 
Markov  chain,  the  information  contents  (HJ  of 
oligonucleotide (20-mer) and  DNA fragment  (1.0kb)  are 
3.01  and  150.51,  respectively.  The  information  content 
is  proportional  to the  length  of  the  probe,  and  the  DNA 
fragment of 1.0kb provides  50  times  more  information 
on  sequence  differences. 

invalid.  While  hybridization  signals 

Acknowledgments 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Korea  Research 
Foundation  Grant  (KRF-2002-015-CSOOS?). 

References 
Behr,  M.A., Wilson,  M.A.,  Gill,  W.  P.,  Salamon,  H.,  Schoolnik, 
G.  K.,  Rane,  S.,  and SmaU,  P.  M.  (1999).  Comparative genomics 
of  BCG  vaccines  by whole  genomic  DNA  microarray.  Science 

284,  1520-1523. 

Chakravarti,  A.  (1999).  Population  genetics-making  sense out of 

sequence.  Nat.  Genet.  21,  56-60. 

Cho,  J.-c. and  Tiedje,  J.  M.  (2000).  Biogeography and  degree 
of endemicity of  fluorescent  Pseudomonas in  soil.  Appl.  Environ. 
Microbial.  66,  5448-5456. 

Cho,  J.-G.  and  Tiedje,  J.  M.  (2001).  Bacterial  species determination 
from  DNA-DNA hybridization  by  using  genome fragments  and 
DNA  microarrays.  Appl.  Environ.  Microbial.  67,  3677-3882. 
Cho,  J.-c. and  liedje, J.  M.  (2002).  Quantitative detection  d  microbial 
genes using  DNA  microarrays.  Appl.  Environ.  Microbial.  68, 
1425-1430. 

Dong,  Y.,  Glasner,  J.  D.,  Blasttner,  F.  R,  and Triplett,  E.  W.  (2001). 
Genomic  interspecies  microarray hybridization:  rapid  discovery 
of three thousand  genes in  the  maize endophyte,  Klebsiella 
pneumoniae 342,  by  microarray hybridization  with  Escherichia 
co/iK-12 open  reading  frames.  App/.  Environ.  Microbial.  67, 
1911-1921. 

Gerry,  N.  P.,  Witowski,  N.  E.,  Day,  J.,  Hammer,  R  P.,  and  Barany, 
G.  (1999).  Universal  DNA  microarray method  for  multiplex 
detection of  low abundance  point mutations.  J.  Mol.  Bioi.  292, 
251-262. 

Hada,  J.  G.,  Fan,  J.  B.,  Ryder,  0.,  Jin,  L,  Edgemon,  K.,  Ghandour, 
G.,  Mayer,  R A.,  Sun,  B.,  Hsie,  L.,  Robbins,  C.  M.,  L.  C.  Brody, 
Wang,  D.,  Lander,  E.  S.,  Lipshutz,  R,  Fodor,  S.  P.,  and  Collins, 
F.  S.  (1999).  Determination  of  ancestral  alleles  for  human 
single-nucleotide  polymorphisms  using  high-density 
oligonucleotide  arrays,  Nat.  Genet.  22,  164-167. 

Karlin,  S.  and  Mrazek,  J.  (1999).  Prokaryotic genome-wide 
comparisons  and  evolutionary implicatrions.  In  Bacterial 
Genomes: Physical Structure and Analysis,  F.  J.  deBruijn,  J. 
R Lupski,  G.  M.  Weinstock,  eds.  (Norwell,  MA:  Kluwer  Academic 
Publishers),  pp.196-212. 

Legendre,  P.  and  Legendre,  L.  (1998).  Numerical Ecology (Elsevier 

Science,  Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands). 

Li,  F.  and  Stormo,  G.  D.  (2001).  Selection  of  optimal  DNA  oligos 
for  gene expression  arrays.  Bioinformatics 17,  1067-1076. 
Murray,  A.  E.,  Lies,  D.,  Li,  G.,  Nealson,  K.,  Zhou,  J.,  and  Tiedje, 
J.  M.  (2001).  DNA/DNA hybridization to microarray  reveals 
gene-specific differences  between  closely  related  microbial 
genomes.  Proc.  Nat!.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  98,  9853-9858. 

Olsen,  G.  J.,  Woese,  C.  R.,  and  Overbeek,  R.  (1994).  The  winds 
of  evolutionary change:  Breathing  new life  into  microbiology, 
J.  Bacterial.  176,  1-6. 

Pielou,  E.  C.  (1966).  The  measurement  of  diversity  in  different types 

of  biological  collections.  J.  Theor.  Bioi.  13,  131-144. 

Rademaker,  J.  L.,  Haste,  L.  W.,  Louws,  F.  J.,  Kersters,  K.,  Swings, 
J.,  Vauterin,  L.,  Vauterin,  P.,  and  deBruijn,  F.  J.  (2000). 
Comparison  of  AFLP  and  rep-PCR genomic fingerprinting  with 
DNA-DNA homology  studies:  Xanthomonas as  a  model  system. 
Int.  J.  Syst.  Evol.  Microbial.  50,  665-677. 

Torsvik,  V.,  Gokoyr,  J.,  and  Daae,  F.  L.  (1990).  High  diversity in 
DNA  of  soil  bacteria.  App/.  Environ.  Microbial.  56,  782-787. 
Wayne,  L.  G.,  Brenner,  D.  J.,  Colwell,  R.  R.,  Grimont,  P.  A.  D., 
Kandler,  0.,  Krichevsky,  M.  I.,  and  Truper,  H.  G.  (1987).  Report 
of  the  ad  hoc committee  on  reconciliation  of  approaches to 
bacterial  systematics.  Int.  J.  Syst.  Bacterial.  37,  463-464. 
Woese,  C.  R (1987).  Bacterial  evolution.  Microbiol.  Rev.  51,  221-271. 

