APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(1)  38-40,  March  2009

EST  Knowledge  Integrated  Systems  (EKIS):  An  Integrated 
Database  of  EST  Information  for  Research  Application

Dae-Won  Kim1†,  Tae-Sung  Jung1†,  Young- 
Sang  Choi3†,  Seong-Hyeuk  Nam1,2,  Hyuk-Ryul 
Kwon1,  Dong-Wook  Kim3,  Han-Suk  Choi3,  Sang- 
Heang  Choi1  and  Hong-Seog  Park1,2*

1Genome  Research  Center,  Korea  Research  Institute  of 
Bioscience  and  Biotechnology,  Daejeon  305-806,  Korea, 
2Department  of  Functional  Genome,  University  of  Scien-
ce  and  Technology,  Daejeon  305-333,  Korea,  3Depart-
ment  of  Multimedia  Engineering,  Mokpo  National  Uni-
versity,  Jeonnam  534-729,  Korea

Abstract

The  EST  Knowledge  Integrated  System,  EKIS  (http://ekis. 
kribb.re.kr),  was  established  as  a  part  of  Korea's 
Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology  initiative 
for  genome  sequencing  and  application  research  of  the 
biological  model  organisms  (GEAR)  project.  The  goals  of 
the  EKIS  are  to  collect  EST  information  from  GEAR  proj-
ects  and  make  an  integrated  database  to  provide  tran-
scriptomic  and  metabolomic  information  for  biological 
scientists.  The  EKIS  constitutes  five  independent  cate-
gories  and  several  retrieval  systems  in  each  category  for 
incorporating  massive  EST  data  from  high-throughput 
sequencing  of  65  different  species.  Through  the  EKIS 
database,  scientists  can  freely  access  information  in-
cluding  BLAST  functional  annotation  as  well  as  Gene-
chip  and  pathway  information  for  KEGG.  By  integrating 
complex  data  into  a  framework  of  existing  EST  knowl-
edge  information,  the  EKIS  provides  new  insights  into 
specialized  metabolic  pathway  information  for  an  ap-
plied  industrial  material.

Keywords:  biological  system,  data  mining,  expressed  se-
quence  tag,  functional  annotation,  metabolic  pathways

Introduction

The  advent  of  high-throughput  genomic  sequencing 
technologies  (Gupta,  2008;  Jeong, et al.,  2008)  has  cre-

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  hspark@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8132,  Fax  +82-42-879-8139
Accepted  8  January  2009
†The  authors  wish  it  to  be  known  that,  in  their  opinion,  the 
first  three  authors  listed  should  be  regarded  as  joint  First 
Authors.

ated  an  enormous  amount  of  information  and  resulted  in 
an  increasing  number  of  publicly  available  genomes  and 
experimental  data.  As  a  result  of  the  current  genomics 
revolution,  genome  sequence  data  from  well-known 
model  organisms  is  abundantly  discovered  and  anno-
tated  (Bhak,  et  al.,  2008;  Hubbard,  et  al.,  2002; 
Karolchik  et al.,  2008;  Mailman,  et al.,  2007;  Pruitt,  et 
al.,  2007).  However,  the  circumstance  is  different  for 
novel  organisms  coming  from  smaller  expressed  se-
quence  tag  (EST)  sequencing  projects.  Many  EST  results 
are  currently  created  by  small  laboratories  without  bio-
informatics  computing  systems  which  are  commonly 
available  to  genomic  sequencing  centers.  Furthermore, 
these  laboratories  are  generally  lack  of  sufficient  funds 
for  sequencing,  analyzing  and  managing  the  data.  As 
such,  a  deluge  of  genomic  data  is  difficult  to  control 
without  appropriate  funding  for  sequence  character-
ization  and  genome  data  management  for  the  purposes 
of  effective  access  by  biologists  and  the  general  public. 
To  solve  this  problem,  we  have  recently  advanced  a 
not-for-profit  initiative  for  genomic  sequencing  and  ap-
plication  research  of  biological  model  organism  projects 
in  order  to  provide  extensive  genome  data  to  the 
scientists.  We  have  also  developed  a  user-friendly  web 
site  to  facilitate  access  to  sequences  information  of 
novel  creatures.
    Here,  we  demonstrate  a  newly  developed  website, 
EKIS,  which  stands  for  EST  Knowledge  Integration 
System.  This  website  facilitates  the  annotation  of  new 
sequences  with  EC  numbers  and  KEGG  pathways 
based  on  BLASTX  homology  searches  against  the 
UniProt  database  using 
(http://pestas. 
kribb.re.kr/;  unpublished).  The  EKIS  is  utilized  not  only 
as  a  generic  website  for  obtaining  genome  project  sta-
tistics,  such  as  samples,  libraries,  analyzing  ESTs,  and 
annotated  ESTs  in  current  ongoing  projects,  but  also  as 
a  mining  tool  for  the  KEGG  pathway  based  on  anno-
tated  EC  numbers,  expression  profiling,  homology 
searches  and  retrieval  information  systems. 

the  PESTAS 

Features  and  Results

Method

The  EKIS,  based  on  information  derived  from  65  EST 
sequencing  projects  (May  2008),  is  an  integrated  knowl-
edge  database  developed  using  cutting-edge  internet 
technology  (Fig.  1a).  To  construct  the  data  integrated 

EKIS:  Integrated  Enzyme  Database    39

Fig.  1.  Screenshot  of  EKIS  graphical  display.  The  interface  contains  three  sections.  The  red  box  in  the  top  left  section 
shows  the  main  page  of  EKIS.  The  orange  box  in  the  left  section  displays  a  variety  of  retrieval  systems  (ongoing  EST  proj-
ects,  sample  information,  constructed  library,  enzyme  and  pathways,  blast  search  and  Genechip).  The  green  box  at  the  bot-
tom  left  illustrates  the  KEGG  map  with  a  graphical  representation  using  a  variety  of  colors.  See  user  guide  for  more  details
regarding  EKIS.

system  for  EKIS,  all  sequenced  EST  data  was  annotated 
using  the  PESTAS  (http://pestas.kribb.re.kr/pestas.jsp), 
mainly  using  BLASTX  against  public  protein  databases 
(NCBI NR database, UniProtKB-TrEMBL, UniProtKB-Swiss- 
Prot  and  KEGG),  and  these  are  fundamental  information 
for  establishing  EKIS.  The  processed  information  are 
stored  in  relational  tables  designed  in  a  typical  key/val-
ue  pair  fashion  as  the  physical  using  a  MySQL  data-
base,  and  are  indexed  for  retrieval  and  quick  data 
access.  The  web 
in 
JavaScript  and  Adobe  Flex  running  on  an  Apache  web 
server. 

interface  was 

implemented 

Implementation

The  EKIS  is  composed  of  five  main  categories  (animal, 
plant,  microbial,  insect  and  marine)  (Fig.  1a)  and  con-
tains  expressed  transcript  networks  for  32,803  enzymes 
(7,465  for  oxidoreductases,  9,616  for  transfereases, 
9,633  for  hydrolases,  2,423  for  lyases,  1,465  for  isomer-
ases,  and  2,201  for  ligases  base  on  the  enzyme  com-
mission).  Each  category  consists  mainly  of  six  types  of 

pages  (Fig.  1a  and  1c):  a  project  outline,  a  construction 
of  library,  an  EST  projects  summary,  an  integrated  in-
formation  retrieval,  a  pathway  search,  and  a  drug-com-
pound  page.  The  pathway  search  page  is  the  core  of 
the  EKIS  which  is  designed  for  retrieving  pathway  in-
formation  for  KEGG  (Fig  1c).  To  construct  these  path-
ways,  we  extracted  EC  numbers  from  the  description  of 
UniProt  results,  and  these  EC  numbers  were  mapped  to 
a  KEGG  pathway  map  with  graphical  images.  In  addi-
tion,  we  have 
the  concept  of 
Genechip  to  detect  gene  expression  differences  in  each 
project  by  making  a  comparison  with  the  count  of  ac-
cession  id  containing  actual  sequences  from  BLAST 
functional  annotations. 

further  developed 

Result

The  EKIS  contains  an  index  of  all  annotation  information 
taken  from  GEAR  projects.  With  this  integrated  data-
base,  we  are  now  able  to  find  all  pathways  that  belong 
to  a  specified  EC  number  and  enzyme  name  in  each 
project  of  the  source  databases  and  obtain  a  list  of  the 

40    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(1)  38-40,  March  2009

corresponding  project  or/and  transcript  IDs  for  cross- 
linking  to  each  of  the  original  databases.  This  provides 
EST  project  summary  information,  including  the  col-
lected  sample,  library,  analyzing  EST  and  annotated  EST 
project  list  (Fig.  1b).  It  should  be  noted  that  the  EKIS 
does  not  include  the  entire  contents  of  each  source 
project  database  (e.g.  raw  EST  data,  all  functional  anno-
tation  information,  detailed  project  information,  etc.),  but 
does  provide  the  necessary  fundamental  project  or/and 
transcript  IDs  through  which  users  can  access  the  origi-
nal  project  databases  to  obtain  all  available  information. 
If  a  user  wants  to  access  complete  information  about  a 
certain  project,  he  or  she  should  contact  the  host  of 
that  project  individually. 

Future  perspectives

In  order  to  achieve  a  complete  understanding  of  the  bi-
ological  pathways  of  an  organism,  it  is  essential  to 
monitor  the  complete  complement  of  all  small  molecule 
metabolites  found  in  a  specific  tissue  or  organism  at  the 
metabolome  level  and  gene  expression  at  the  tran-
scriptome  level,  respectively.  The  important  next  step 
towards  this  goal  will  include  the  integration  of  ex-
perimental  data  on  enzymes  resulting  from  all  fields  of 
functional  genomics  as  well  as  an  analysis  of  the  quan-
titative  and  qualitative  collection  of  virtually  all  meta-
bolites.  In  addition,  this  will  require  full-length  cDNA  da-
ta,  which  is  a  particularly  important  resource  for  de-
termining  their  structural  features.  Ultimately,  we  will 
construct  a  discovery  system  for  industrial  enzymes  in 
pursuit  of  a  multi-purpose  bioinformatics-cheminfor-
matics-medical  informatics  system  with  a  strong  focus 
on  new  financial  opportunities  and  novel  intellectual 
properties.

Acknowledgements

This  study  was  supported  by  grant  M10752000001- 
07N5200-00110  from  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science 
and  Technology  and  grant  KGM1230812  from  the  Korea 

Research  Institute  of  Bioscience  and  Biotechnology 
(KRIBB).

References

Bhak,  J.,  Ghang,  H.,  Reja,  R.,  and  Kim,  S.  (2008).  Personal 
genomics,  bioinformatics,  and  variomics.  Genomics  & 
Informatics  6,  161-165.

Gupta,  P.K.  (2008).  Single-molecule  DNA  sequencing  tech-
nologies  for  future  genomics  research. Trends Biotechnol. 
26,  602-611.

Hubbard,  T.,  Barker,  D.,  Birney,  E.,  Cameron,  G.,  Chen,  Y., 
Clark,  L.,  Cox,  T.,  Cuff,  J.,  Curwen,  V.,  Down,  T.,  Durbin, 
R.,  Eyras,  E.,  Gilbert,  J.,  Hammond,  M.,  Huminiecki,  L., 
Kasprzyk,  A.,  Lehvaslaiho,  H.,  Lijnzaad,  P.,  Melsopp,  C., 
Mongin,  E.,  Pettett,  R.,  Pocock,  M.,  Potter,  S.,  Rust,  A., 
Schmidt,  E.,  Searle,  S.,  Slater,  G.,  Smith,  J.,  Spooner, 
W.,  Stabenau,  A.,  Stalker,  J.,  Stupka,  E.,  Ureta-Vidal,  A., 
Vastrik,  I.,  and  Clamp,  M.  (2002).  The  ensembl  genome 
database  project.  Nucleic Acids Res.  30,  38-41.

Jeong,  H.,  and  Kim,  J.F.  (2008).  An  optimized  strategy  for 
genome  assembly  of  sanger/pyrosequencing  hybrid  data 
using  available  software.  Genomics  &  Informatics  6, 
87-90.

Karolchik,  D.,  Kuhn,  R.M.,  Baertsch,  R.,  Barber,  G.P., 
Clawson,  H.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Giardine,  B.,  Harte,  R.A., 
Hinrichs,  A.S.,  Hsu,  F.,  Kober,  K.M.,  Miller,  W.,  Pedersen, 
J.S.,  Pohl,  A.,  Raney,  B.J.,  Rhead,  B.,  Rosenbloom,  K.R., 
Smith,  K.E.,  Stanke,  M.,  Thakkapallayil,  A.,  Trumbower, 
H.,  Wang,  T.,  Zweig,  A.S.,  Haussler,  D.,  and  Kent,  W.J. 
(2008).  The  UCSC  genome  browser  database:  2008 
update.  Nucleic. Acids Res.  36,  D773-779.

Mailman,  M.D.,  Feolo,  M.,  Jin,  Y.,  Kimura,  M.,  Tryka,  K., 
Bagoutdinov,  R.,  Hao,  L.,  Kiang,  A.,  Paschall,  J.,  Phan, 
L.,  Popova,  N.,  Pretel,  S.,  Ziyabari,  L.,  Lee,  M.,  Shao,  Y., 
Wang,  Z.Y.,  Sirotkin,  K.,  Ward,  M.,  Kholodov,  M.,  Zbicz, 
K.,  Beck,  J.,  Kimelman,  M.,  Shevelev,  S.,  Preuss,  D., 
Yaschenko,  E.,  Graeff,  A.,  Ostell,  J.,  and  Sherry,  S.T. 
(2007).  The  NCBI  dbGaP  database  of  genotypes  and 
phenotypes.  Nat. Genet.  39,  1181-1186.

Pruitt,  K.D.,  Tatusova,  T.,  and  Maglott,  D.R.  (2007).  NCBI 
reference  sequences  (RefSeq):  a  curated  non-redundant 
sequence  database  of  genomes,  transcripts  and  proteins. 
Nucleic. Acids Res.  35,  D61-65.

