Genomics &  Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 180-183, December 2004 

Comparative Statistic Module {CSM} for Significant Gene 
Seledion 

Young-Jin Kim*,  Hyo-Mi Kim*, Sang-Bae Kim, 
Chan Park,  Kuchan Kimm and lnSong Koh 

Division  of  Epidemiology  and  Bioinformatics,  National 
Genome  Research  Institute,  National  Institute  of  Health, 
5  Nokbun-dong,  Eunpyeong-gu,  Seoul  122-701,  Korea 

*These  authors  contributed  equally  to  this  work. 

Abstract 
Comparative  Statistic  Module{CSM)  provides  more 
reliable list of significant genes to genomics researchers 
by offering the commonly selected genes and a method 
of choice by calculating  the rank of each  statistical test 
based on the average ranking of common genes across 
the  five  statistical  methods,  i.e.  t-test,  Kruskai-Wallis 
(Wilcoxon  signed  rank) test,  SAM,  two sample multiple 
test, and Empirical Bayesian test. This statistical analysis 
module is implemented in Peri, and R languages. 

Availability: CSM is freely available from http://cmarns.ngri. 
re.kr. 
Keywords:  data analysis, gene exp-ession, nicroarray, significart 
gene selection, statistic module 

Introduction 
Microarray  technology  is  a  powerful  approach  for 
revealing  the patterns of coordinately regulated  genes. 
Due to the considerable amount and intrinsic variation of 
microarray experiment data, statistical approaches have 
been  used  as  a  way  to  obtain  useful  biological 
information (Lobenhofer et at., 2001 ).  Most common task 
in  analysis  of  microarray  data  is  to  infer  differentially 
expressed genes among two or more samples. Various 
statistical methods for identifying differential expression 
have been suggested to determine significant genes out 
of  the  whole  list  of  genes.  According  to  the  various 
modeling assumptions underlying specific tests, statistical 
methods  are  divided  into  three  classes;  parametric, 
nonparametric,  and  semiparametric (Cui  and  Churchill, 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail insong@nih.go.kr, 
Tel +82-31-436-8627, Fax +82-31-436-8636 
Accepted  9 December 2004 

2003).  Different statistical methods using a single set of 
data  may  produce  slightly  or  considerably  different 
results due to specific statistical  assumptions and their 
data  dependency.  A  significant gene by  one  statistical 
method could be insignificant by another (Pan, 2002). No 
single  statistic is  universally optimal  and  there  seldom 
exists  any basis  or guidance for a  particular statistical 
method  of choice:  Therefore,  it  is important not only to 
select  as  many  differentially  expressed  genes  as 
possible  but  also  to  identify  statistically  meaningful 
genes.  We  implemented  Comparative  Statistic Module 
(CSM)  as  a  module  for  previously  developed  eDNA 
Microarray  data  Analysis  and  Management  System 
(cMAMS)  (Kim  et at.,  2004).  CSM  provides  genomics 
researchers  with  robust  significant  gene  selection  and 
suggests  more  reliable  one  among  the  five  statistical 
methods by comparing the statistic ranking order of the 
common genes from different statistic results. The used 
statistical  analysis  methods  are  t-test  (Lowry,  2004 ), 
Kruskai-Wallis test (also known as Wilcoxon signed rank 
test in case of two sample analysis) (Lowry, 2004), SAM 
(Tusher et at.,  2002), two sample multiple test (Ge et at., 
2003;  Dudoit  and  Ge,  2004),  and  Empirical  Bayesian 
model (Efron et at.,  2001). 

Statistical Methods 
A statistical test consists of two steps. The first step is to 
build  a  summary  test  statistic.  The  next  step  is  to 
determine  the  significance  level  with  the  given  test 
statistic.  Usually,  the  significance  level  is  constructed 
under the specified or estimated  modeling  assumption. 
In statistical analysis of microarray data, a relatively less 
sufficient sample size than other types of statistical data 
could mislead model assumption. 

The simplest method called 'fold change determination' 
for differential expression is to evaluate the log ratio  by 
more than a certain arbitrary cut-off value.  It is known to 
be  unreliable  for  various  reasons.  Recently  many 
sophisticated  statistical  methods  have  been  proposed, 
but it still remains to be controversial how accurate these 
methods  are.  We  considered 
the  five  well-known 
methods to identify the statistically significant genes and 
to choose a more reliable method of choice if needed. 

T-test  is  a widely used  statistical  method.  However, 
its  major problem  is  the  strong  assumption  on  the  null 

Comparative Statistic Module (CSM) for Significant Gene Selection  181 

Table  1.  An example of comparative analysis result of Comparative Statistic Module (CSM) with the ALU AML data set (Golub et al., 1999). 

Test Method 

Cut-off Value 

(P value) 

Number of 

Rank SUM 

Rank SUM/ Number of  Method of Choice 

Significant Genes 

Common Genes* 

Rank 
2 
4 
5 
3 
1*** 

T-test 
Kruskai-Wallis 
2-sample multiple 
E-Bayes 
SAM 
*the number of commonly selected genes = 663 
**/***Strictly speaking, the SAM rank is not comparable with other test ranks,  although estimated corresponding FOR cut-off value for p-value of 

342.8916 
351.4081 
448.0467 
344.0557 
342.8795 

227,680 
233,335 
297,503 
228,453 
227,672 

0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 

10% FOR** 

1,045 
1,055 
883 
714 
1,121 

0.05 is around 0.1 

Microarray data profile 
For two experiments 

Find commonly selected 

gene list 

Statistical 

test methods 

I T-test 

Kruskai-Wallis test 

SAM(Significant  Analysis 
of  Microarray) 

I  Empirical Bayesian 

I Multiple test 

Ranking the commonly 

selected genes in each of 

test methods 

Calculate the mean ranking 

in each test 

Genes  of  each  result  are 

sorted  by  their  test  statistics 

or  p-values 

Ranking the test method by 

the mean  ranking 

calculated 

Fig.  1.  Architecture of Comparative Statistic Module (CSM).  Each statistical test is performed based on a specified cut-off value 
and sample group settings set by users. Commonly selected gene sets are provided with the brief comparative result summary of 
the five statistical methods. 

distributions of the test statistics. The Wilcoxon rank-sum 
test  is  a  nonparametric  alternative  to  the  two-sample 
t-test  which 
is  based  on  the  order  in  which  the 
observations  from  the  two  samples  fall.  When  the 
assumption of the two-sample t-test holds, the Wilcoxon 
test is somewhat less likely to detect a location shift than 
the  two-sample  t-test  is  (Lowry,  2004).  Two  sample 
multiple test uses an adjusted p-value for complementing 
large  multiplicity  problems 
thousands  of 
hypotheses are tested  simultaneously (Dudoit and  Ge, 
2004).  There  are  many  criteria  for  calculating  the 
adjusted  p-value  in  two  sample  multiple  test.  But  it  is 
hard  to  know  which  criterion  is  the  best.  Efron  and 
colleagues (2001) developed a simple Empirical  Bayes 
test.  This  approach  produces  reliable  a  posteriori 
probabilities of activity differences for each gene, starting 
with  a  minimum  of a  priori assumptions.  Significance 

in  which 

Analysis  of Microarray (SAM)  assigns  a score to  each 
gene on the basis of change in gene expression relative 
to  the  standard  deviation  of  repeated  measurements. 
SAM uses permutations of the repeated measurements 
to estimate the percentage of genes identified by chance, 
i.e. the false discovery rate (Tusher eta/., 2002). 

Comparative Statistic Module 
CSM  for  differentially  expressed  gene  is  implemented 
using the aforementioned five statistical methods. These 
methods determine significant genes by two experimental 
groups. This module presents commonly selected genes 
first  and  proposes  a  method  of choice  among  the  five 
statistical methods by assigning ranks by calculating the 
average rank of the commonly selected genes (Table 1 
and Fig.  1). 

182  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  2(4) 180-183,  December 2004 

Comparative Analysis for differentlally expressed genes 

C\lmpamtiie Analy$~ Group Settmg 

l·slalislies 
·•Kvlw.lfatilfies 

.. -.. 

SAMresviiiiiJI 

I 

Fig.  2.  General interface of Comparative Statistic Module (CSM).  Data input with comma-separated values file(.csv). 
Upper  left  screenshot:  Users  select  methods  and  adjust  cut-off  values  of  the  statistical  methods.  Upper  right 
screet;~shot: the analysis result menu for the five statistical  methods.  Lower left screenshot: the comparative analysis 
result screen shows two result tables. The top one is a brief comparative result summary of the five statistical methods 
and the bottom one is the list of the commonly selected genes with a specified significance level for each method. Lower 
right screenshot:  Several charts show the results oft-test, two sample multiple test and SAM test. 

Each statistical method lists up the significant genes 
and  their  ranks  at  a  specified  significance  level.  The 
specific rank  of the  same gene could  be  very different 
across the  five  statistical  methods due to  difference  in 
specific statistical assumptions. Some significant genes 
by  one  statistical  method  could  be  insignificant  by 
another,  but  some  genes could  be  commonly  listed  in 
every test. We suggest that these common genes listed 
in every test would be more reliable than those listed in a 
single statistical test result. Experimental confirmation is 
desired  to  be  performed  first with  these  robustly  listed 
common genes. 

A user inputs a data set containing gene expression 
profiles.  The  CSM  module  computes  the  rank  of each 
gene in each test satisfying a certain significance level of 
p-value (e.g. p=O.OS) which is given by a user.  It outputs 
the commonly selected gene set including all significant 

genes  in  each  test,  average  rank  of  each  test,  and 
method of choice rank among the five tests (Fig. 2). We 
provide the ranks of the five tests to decide a method of 
choice for given input data. We performed a sample run 
for the CSM module with ALU AML data set (Golub eta/., 
1999).  The  result  is  shown  in  Table  1.  The  number of 
common  genes  is  663  and  SAM  is  suggested  as  the 
method  of choice  with  the  given  data.  CSM  helps  to 
choose an optimal statistical method for significant gene 
selection  by providing  a brief summary of comparative 
result for the five statistical methods. 

The  current  version  aims  to  increase  the  statistical 
significance of differentially expressed genes that might 
become  interesting  targets  for  further  studies.  The 
implemented CSM is added as a module to cMAMS with 
R  sources  (http://www.r-project.org).  Despite  the  fact 
that p-value is not suitable for small sample size data as 

Comparative Statistic Module (CSM) for Significant Gene Selection  183 

in  microarray experiments,  in  which  the  sample size is 
less enough to ensure normal distribution, the four tests 
except SAM  in  this module use p-value as significance 
level  measures.  Future  version  will  attempt  to  convert 
each  p-value  into  corresponding  False  Positive  Rate 
(FOR) to improve the statistical robustness for identifying 
common genes and to decide a method of choice in the 
five test methods. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported  by the  intramural fund  of the 
National Institute of Health, Korea. Authors would like to 
thank  Mr.  Joshua  Yang  for  his  proof  reading  of  the 
manuscript. 

References 

Cui,  X.  and  Churchill,  G.A.  (2003).  Statistical  tests  for 
differential expression in eDNA microarray experiments. 
Genome Bioi.  4(4):210. 

Dudoit,  S.  and Ge,  Y.  (2004).  Bioconductor's multtest 
package.  http://www. mssm. edu!facultylyongchao-ge! 
multtesUmulttest. pdf 

Efron, B.,  Tishirani,  R.,  Storey, J.D., and Tusher, V.  (2001 ). 
Empirical  Bayes  analysis  of a  microarray  experiment. 
Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association  96, 
1151-1160. 

Ge,  Y.,  Dudoit,  S.,  and  Speed  T.P.  (2003).  Resampling-

based  multiple  testing  for  microarray  data  analysis. 
TEST  12,  1-44  (plus  discussion  p.  44-77).  (Technical 
Report) 

Golub,  T.R.,  Slonim,  O.K.,  Tamayo,  P.,  Huard,  C., 
Gaasenbeek,  M.,  Mesirov,  J.P.,  Coller,  H.,  Loh,  M.L., 
Downing,  J.R.,  Caligiuri,  M.A.,  Bloomeld,  C.D.,  and 
Lander,  E.S.  (1999).  Molecular classification  of cancer: 
class discovery and class prediction by gene expression 
monitoring.  Science 286,  531-537. 

Kim,  S.B.,  Kim,  Y.J.,  Kim,  H.M. Jung, H.Y.,  Lee,  E.J.,  Park, 
J.S.,  Park,  Y.J.,  and  Koh,  I.S.  (2004).  cMAMS:  eDNA 
Microarray  data  Analysis  and  Management  System. 
Proceedings  of  the  31st  Korea  information  Science 
Society Spring Conference 2,  247-249. 

Lobenhofer,  E.K.,  Bushel,  P.R.,  Afshari,  C.A.,  and 
Hamadeh,  H.K.  (2001).  Progress  in  the  application  of 
DNA microarrays. Environ.  Health Perspect 109, 881-891. 
Lowry,  R.  (2004).  Concept  and  Applications  of  inferential 

statistics.  http://faculty. vassar.edu/lowry/webtext.html. 

Pan, W.  (2002). A comparative review of statistical methods 
for  discovering  differentially  expressed  genes 
in 
replicated  microarray  experiments.  Bioinformatics  18, 
546-554. 

The R Project for Statistical Computing. (2004). http://www.r(cid:173)

project. org. 

Tusher,  V.G.,  Narsimhan,  B.,  Tibshirani,  R.,  and  Chu,  G. 
(2002). Significance analysis of microarrays. User Guide 
and  Technical  Documentation.  http://www-statstanford. 
edul-tibs!SAMI. 

