Minireview 

Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  3(2) 47-51, June 2005 

Higher Order Knowledge Processing: Pathway Database 
and Ontologies 

Ken lchiro Fukuda 

Objects with Hierarchies) project as an example. 

Computational  Biology  Research  Center  (CBRC), 
National  Institute  of  Advanced  Industrial  Science  and 
Technology  (AIST),  AIST  Tokyo  Waterfront  Bio-IT 
Research  Bldg.  10F.  42  Aomi,  Koutou-ku,  Tokyo 
135-0064,  Japan 

Abstract 
Molecular  mechanisms  of  biological  processes  are 
typically  represented  as  "pathways" that  have a graph(cid:173)
analogical  network  structure.  However,  due  to  the 
diversity of topics that pathways cover,  their constituent 
biological entities are highly diverse and the semantics is 
embedded  implicitly.  The  kinds  of  interactions  that 
connect  biological  entities  are 
likewise  diverse. 
Consequently, how to model or process pathway data is 
not  a  trivial  issue.  In  this  review  article,  we  give  an 
in  pathway  database 
overview  of 
development by taking the I NOH project as an example. 

the  challenges 

Keywords:  pathway  database,  ontology,  signal  trans(cid:173)
duction, textual knowledge 

Introduction 
As  the  genome  of  many  species  has  now  been 
sequenced, the target of biological knowledge acquisition 
has  shifted  from  elucidating  the features  of  genes  and 
proteins  to  discovering  the  underlying  mechanisms  of 
biological functions, an ensemble of collaborating proteins 
and  other  molecules.  Not  only  the  combinations  of 
interacting proteins and chemicals but also the relations 
of  each  molecule  to  cellular,  physiological  or  organism 
level  functions  have  to  be  identified.  Each  biological 
function has a particular combination of these interactions 
or  relations  that  explains  the  underlying  molecular 
mechanisms.  This  set  of  interactions  form  a  network 
structure called  pathway.  In  this  review article,  we give 
an  overview  of  the  challenges  in  pathway  database 
development  by  taking  the  INOH  (Integrating  Network 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail fukuda.cbrc@aist.go.jp, 
Tel  +81-3-3599-8049,  Fax +81-3-3599-8081 
Accepted  30  May 2005 

Biological Pathways 
Pathway data are "processed" rather than "raw' knowledge 
or  data,  and  are  integrated  from  multiple  knowledge 
sources.  A  pathway is  a  model  of the  mechanism  of  a 
biological function. The model is derived from biologists' 
interpretation  of  different  experiment  results  and  other 
pathways  reported  in  the scientific literature.  Therefore 
sharing pathway knowledge means sharing the  current 
understanding of molecular biology. 

Signal  transduction  pathway,  which  describes  the 
mechanisms  of  various  life  phenomena  in  terms  of 
interacting  proteins  and  other  bio-molecules,  is  a good 
example  of  this  type  of  knowledge.  Their  constituent 
biological  entities  are  highly  diverse  and  range  from 
metal ions to proteins to biological processes in general. 
Likewise, the kinds of interactions that connect biological 
entities are diverse. To unveil a new signal transduction 
pathway,  a  biologist  has  to  integrate  various  types  of 
distilled knowledge. 

Since  pathway  relates  physical  entities  such  as 
proteins and chemicals to biological functions, they have 
the  potential  to  serve  as  a  new  infrastructure for  high(cid:173)
throughput experiment analysis,  drug target screening, 
and fundamental  molecular biology. 

However, pathway data continue to reside primarily in 
the scientific literature and providing this knowledge in a 
computable form is crucial. This is the reason why pathway 
database  development  and  pathway  data 
format 
standardization  becomes very  important.  It  is  said that 
there are  over 150 pathway databases currently in  the 
world. 

Pathway databases 
Higher-order knowledge  is  a  knowledge  that  has to  be 
described  by  multiple  objects.  While  an  entry  in  a 
sequence database describes the attributes of a single 
biological entity, an entry in a pathway database consists 
of  many  different  biological  entities  and  interactions. 
Therefore, implementation of a pathway database is not 
straight forward. There are two simple way of doing this 
but neither of them is sufficient. One is to decompose all 
pathways into their interactions and aggregate them to a 

48  Genomics &  Informatics  Vol.  3(2) 47-51, June 2005 

set of binary relations.  The other is  to prepare a  hand(cid:173)
drawn clickable map for each pathway. In binary relation 
set based databases, a pathway is literally a graph and is 
defined as a connected component of the  interactions. 
You  can  apply many graph theoretical  queries  but this 
model  makes  it  difficult  to  define  sub-pathways  or 
processes.  In  other  words,  it  is  difficult  to  annotate 
contextual  information.  In  illustration  based  databases, 
each  illustration  represents  its  contextual  information 
and hyperlinks to other databases are embedded in the 
map.  Although  you  can  present  a  drawing  for  each 
pathway as it appears in the literature, this results in very 
limited computability. 

The  type  of  knowledge  we  want  to  represent  in  a 
pathway  database  and  the  type  of  query  we  want  to 
conduct  on  a  pathway  database  are  not  apparent. 
Consequently, 
there  are  many  ongoing  pathway 
database projects, each of which targets different types 
and levels of knowledge. 

Historically,  pathway database  development started 
from  metabolic  pathways 
(EcoCyc[1],  KEGG[2]). 
Metabolism is largely conserved among species and we 
have matured consensus knowledge on these pathways, 
which can be described by chemical reactions and their 
in  a  unified  way.  Subsequently,  several 
catalysts 
databases attempted to encode other levels of biological 
functions,  such  as  transcription  regulation  pathway 
(TRANSPATH[3]),  protein-protein 
interaction  maps 
(BIND,  http://bind.ca/,  DIP,  http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/, 
HPRD, http://www.hprd.org,  IntAct, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ 
intact!index.jsp). This required wider coverage of concepts 
compared to biochemical pathways. 

To relate physical entities to various levels of biological 
phenomena,  for example,  cellular processes and  disease 
pathways,  we  need  a  framework  that  is  able  to  handle 
multiple  processes  in  different  granularities.  INOH  (http:// 
www.inoh.org),  PATIKA  (http://www.patika.org),  aMaze 
(http://www.amaze.uib.ac.be),  and  Reactome  (http://www. 
reactome.org)  focus  on  biological  processes  at  various 
levels,  with  !NOH  and  Reactome  performing  manual 
curation from the scientific literature. These databases are 
process-oriented  in  the sense  that  they use a compound(cid:173)
graph structure. Compound graph is a hierarchical graph in 
which  each  node can  contain  a graph  inside itself.  This 
feature  makes  compound  graph  suitable  for  sub(cid:173)
pathways or sub-processes annotations. 

Also  worth  mentioning  is  BioPAX1),  which  is  not  a 
database but a data exchange format for pathway data, 
its  current  level  1 release  is  limited to the  exchange of 
metabolic  pathway  data.  However, 
roadmap 

the 

1) http://www.biopax.org 

includes higher levels of pathways in level 3 and 4. 

Ontologies 
In any of the above cases,  the curator has to annotate 
meanings to each pathway object. To provide machine(cid:173)
accessible  pathway  knowledge  that  resides  in  the 
scientific  literature,  encoding  topological  structure  of 
pathways is not sufficient. 

For example, it is not easy to specify a single sequence 
identity automatically for each molecule name that appears 
in the scientific literature. A molecule name may stand for 
concepts  of various  granularities,  from  concrete  objects 
such  as  H-Ras and  ERK1  to abstract concepts  (generic 
concepts) or categories such as Ras and MAPK or kinase. 
Usually,  biologists  have  the  appropriate  background 
knowledge and  know that H-Ras is one of the  Ras,  and 
ERK1  is one of the MAPKs. However, computer systems 
have no such background knowledge. By annotating only 
the names of molecules, the relation between H-Ras and 
Ras is lost. Hence, background knowledge that biologists 
use to interpret pathway diagrams has to be made explicit 
and available to computers. 

To accomplish this, the I NOH project provides a set of 
ontologies 
for  pathway  annotation.  Each  of  our 
ontologies is used to annotate certain types of objects or 
attributes  of  objects  (biological  processes,  proteins, 
chemicals, localization, etc.) in a pathway. 

INOH project 
I NOH is a manually curated signal transduction pathway 
database of model organisms including human,  mouse, 
rat and others.  I NOH focuses on biological processes at 
various  levels.  It  is  based  on  a  compound-graph  data 
model and has a hierarchical and recursive structure. 

In  INOH, a pathway is called an "event".  A flat event 
consists of inpuVoutput entities, conversion reaction and 
its  controllers.  A  compositional  event consists  of  other 
events (sub-pathways). Fig.  1 is an example of an I NOH 
pathway.  Each  rectangle is a node (compound node) of 
this compound graph and these compound nodes have a 
graph  inside  themselves.  The  thick  rectangle  nodes 
represent  protein  complexes  and  the  ovals  represent 
proteins.  The  dotted  rectangles  represent  biological 
the  pathway  "JAK-ST AT 
processes.  For  example 
cascade"  consists 
from 
four  sub-processes 
(four 
rectangles) and one of these sub-processes has its own 
sub-process.  Each  event  (dotted  rectangle)  has  inputs 
which  are  converted  to  outputs.  The  outputs  are  then 
"passed" to the next event as inputs. 

Higher Order Knowledge Processing:  Pathway Database and Ontologies  49 

Fig.  1.  An I NOH pathway. Each rectangle represents a process of different granularity. 

As  mentioned  before,  these  pathway  objects  are 
annotated by a set of ontologies,  such  as protein name 
ontology (MoleculeRole Ontology) and event ontology.2l 

MoleculeRole ontology and Event ontology 
The  MoleculeRole Ontology is a bio-ontology of  protein 
names and protein family names. 

Molecule  names  in  the  scientific  literature  can  be 
classified  into  the  following  categories.  (a)  Concrete(cid:173)
Names:  Names specific enough to identify each of their 
sequences  (Grb2),  (b)  Generic-Names:  Names  that 
stand for several sequences (Ras,  Raf,  MEK,  ERK),  (c) 
Complex-Names:  Names 
to  Complexes 
(PI3K),  (d)  Function-Names:  Names that  describe  only 
functions  without  specifying  a  concrete  or  abstract 
molecule name (tyrosine kinase receptor). 

that  refer 

The  Molecule  Role  Ontology  encodes  (1)  relations 
between  Function-Names  and  Generic-Names  (e.g. 

2)  INOH ontology can  be accessed at http://www.inoh.org 

protein serine/threonine kinase and MAPK), (2) relations 
between  Generic-Names  and  Concrete-Names  (e.g. 
MAPK and ERK1 ),  (3) Complex and its subunit (e.g. Pl3-
kinase  and  Pl3-kinase  p110  subunit),  (4)  Concrete(cid:173)
Names and UniProt accession numbers. All the terms are 
arranged  manually in  a  hierarchical  structure  (a  DAG). 
The  UniProt  (SwissProt/TrEMBL)  accession  numbers 
are identified manually for each Concrete-Name. 

The  Event  Ontology  is  a  DAG  structured  controlled 
vocabulary  for  events.  It  has  four  top  categories  for 
biological  events: 
includes 
molecular  level  phenomena,  (2)  "Cellular  event",  (3) 
"Organism  event",  and  (4)  "Physiological  event".  The 
term in the Event Ontology covers terms that is currently 
not included in the Gene Ontology's bioprocess ontology. 

"Molecular  event" 

(1) 

I NOH pathway queries 
The combination of a hierarchical data model with a set 
of  ontologies  for  annotation  has  several  advantages 

50  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  3(2) 47-51, June 2005 

a) Compound-graph representation 

Bio-process A 

b) Part-whole relation 

c) Term hierarchy 

Fig. 2. Translation of a biological query to a compound graph 
structure. a) Which molecule interacts with cGMP? (C and D via 
X1  and X2). b) Which biological process requires cGMP? (B), c) 
Is Rasa kinase? (yes) 

compared to a plain graph model. 

With ontologies, the user can specify the meaning of 
the query string and the system can  expand  the  query 
based  on  the  ontologies.  With  a  compound  graph 
representation, the user can search part-whole relations 
of  sub-pathways  as  well  as  node  attributes,  edge 
attributes, and their connectivity (Fig. 2). 

As  a  result,  our  user  can  query  any  pathways  or 

biological  components  of  pathways, 
including  sub(cid:173)
pathways,  by  specifying  attributes  of  nodes,  edges, 
pathways, and their values. 

Query search in I NOH with ontological support 
The  ontological  knowledge  can  be  utilized  during  a 
pathway query. For example, if one finds a protein entity 
annotated  as  "MAP  kinase",  she  knows  from  the 
ontology that it may indicate ERK1  of a human, JNK1  of 
a mouse, p38-alpha of a rat,  etc, and vice versa. 

The  unique  feature  of  INOH  is  its  ontology-based 
query  relaxation  search.  If  the  user  enters  "ubiquitin 
ligase" as a query, the system firstly search for pathway 
entities that is directly annotated by the character string 
"ubiquitin 
the  query  by 
expanding the query term according to the MoleculeRole 
ontology and will get pathway entities annotated by,  for 
example,  "Smurf".  Conducting  this  type  of  query  by  a 

then  relaxes 

ligase"  and 

simple  keyword  search  without  ontological  annotation 
would be difficult because the system does not know that 
the  "Smurf"  is  a  type  of  "ubiquitin  ligase".  The  reader 
should note that a system without ontological annotations 
will fail to provide a semantically complete result. 

Discussion 
Compared  to  sequence  data  and  other  conventional 
biological  data,  implementing  or  modeling  a  pathway 
database  is  not  straight  forward.  A  clickable-map  of a 
pathway diagram is easy for human to  understand,  but 
provides only a very limited computability. On the other, 
a binary relation  based pathway representation is easy 
for  computers  to  process  but  difficult  for  human  to 
interpret. 

A  modern  pathway  database  should  have  a 
mechanism to encode contextual information,  i.e. when 
and where the combination of interactions of a particular 
pathway emerges. 

By  adopting  a  hierarchical  and 

recursive 

re(cid:173)

presentation  model  and  annotating  every  biological 
entity in the model with ontologies, one can provide rich 
semantics and a powerful querying facility. 

Ontological  annotations  assure  that  the  system 

returns semantically complete answers. 

Since pathway is a processed knowledge, there could 
be  different  or  conflicting  pathways  for  the  same 
biological  phenomena.  Pathway database will  serve as 
an  infrastructure  to  overview  the  current  biological 
knowledge, 
including  contradicting  or  controversial 
knowledge.  Induction  or  inference  of  new  pathways, 
conflict  detection  would  be  ambitious  and  interesting 
challenges 
the  Semantic  Web  and  other  AI 
techniques for strongly structured knowledge. 

for 

Acknowledgements 
This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  81 RD  of  Japan 
Science and Technology Agency (JST). 

References 
Karp,  P.O.,  Arnaud,  M.,  Collado-Vides,  J.,  Ingraham,  J., 
Paulsen,  I.T.,  and  Saier,  M.H.  Jr.  (2004).  The  E.  coli 
EcoCyc Database: No Longer Just a Metabolic Pathway 
Database. ASM News 70, 25-30. 

Kanehisa,  M.,  Goto,  S.,  Kawashima,  S.,  Okuno,  Y.,  and 
Hattori,  M.  (2004). 'The KEGG resource for deciphering 
the genome",  Nucleic Acids Res.  32,  D277-D280. 

Krull,  M.,  Voss,  N.,  Choi,  C.,  Pistor,  S.,  Potapov,  A.,  and 
Wingender,  E.  (2003).  TRANSPATH®:  An  integrated 

Higher Order Knowledge Processing:  Pathway Database and Ontologies  51 

database  on  signal  transduction  and  a  tool  for  array 
analysis.  Nucleic Acids Res.  31,  97-100. 

Bader,  G.D.,  Donaldson,  1.,  Waiting,  C.,  Ouellette,  B.F.F., 
Pawson,  T.,  and  Hogue,  C.W.V.  (2004}.  "BIND  -
Biomolecular  Interaction  Network  Database"  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  32,  248-250 

Salwinski,  L.,  Miller,  C.S.,  Smith,  A.J.,  Pettit,  F.K.,  Bowie, 
J.U.,  and  Eisenberg,  D.  (2004}.  The  Database  of 
Interacting  Proteins:  2004  update.  Nucleic Acids  Res. 
32,  Database issue,  D449-D451. 

Peri,  S.,  Navarro,  J.D.,  Amanchy,  R.,  Kristiansen,  T.Z., 
Jonnalagadda, C. K.  et at (2003}. Development of human 
protein  reference  database  as  an  initial  platform  for 
approaching  systems  biology  in  humans.  Genome 
Research 13, 2363-2371. 

Hermjakob,  L.,  Montecchi-Palazzi,  C.,  Lewington,  S., 
Mudali,  S.,  Kerrien,  S.,  Orchard,  M.,  Vingron,  B., 
Roechert,  P.,  Roepstorff,  A.,  Valencia,  H.,  Margalit,  J., 
Armstrong, A., Bairoch, G., Cesareni, D., Sherman, I and 
R.,  Apweiler.  (2004).  IntAct- an open source molecular 
interaction  database.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  32,  D452-
D455. 

Fukuda,  K.  Yamagata,  Y.  and  Takagi,  T.  (2003).  FREX:  a 
query 
for  biological  processes  with  a 
hierarchical  and  recursive  structures.  In  Silico.  Bioi.  4, 
0007. 

interface 

Demir,  E.,  Babur,  0.,  Dogrusoz,  U.  et  a/.  (2004).  An 
Ontology for Collaborative Construction and Analysis of 
Cellular Pathways.  Bioinformatics 20, 349-356. 

Van  Heiden,  J.,  Nairn,  A.,  Mancuso,  R.,  Eldridge,  M., 
Wemisch,  L.,  Gilbert,  D.,  and  Wodak,  S.J.  (2000). 
Representing  and  analysing  molecular  and  cellular 
function  using the computer.  Bioi.  Chern.  381,  921-935. 
Joshi-Tope,  G.,  Vastrik,  1.,  Gopinathrao,  G.,  eta/.  (2003}. 
The Genome Knowledgebase: A Resource for Biologists 
and  Bioinformaticists.  In  Cold Spring Harbor Symposia 
on  Quantitative  Biology,  Volume  LXVIII.  Stillman,  B., 
Stewart,  D.  ed.  (Cold  Spring  Harbor Laboratory Press, 
Cold Spring Harbor,  New York} pp.237-244. 

Fukuda,  K. 

and  Takagi,  T. 

(2001).  Knowledge 
Representation  of  Signal  Transduction  Pathways. 
Bioinformatics 17, 829-837. 

Yamamoto,  S.,  Asanuma,  T.,  Takagi,  T.,  and  Fukuda,  K. 
for  Annotation  of  Signal 
(2004).  An  Ontology 
Transduction  Pathway  Molecules 
the  Scientific 
Literature:  Molecule  Role  Ontology.  Camp.  Funct. 
Genom 5,  528-536. 

in 

Harris, M.A., Clark, J., Ireland, A., Lomax, J., Ashburner, M., 
Foulger,  R.,  Eilbeck,  K.,  Lewis,  S.  et  a/.  The  Gene 
Ontology  (GO)  database  and  informatics  resource. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D258-D261. 

