M INIREVIEW

Genomics  &  Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 46-55, June 2007

Molecular Imaging in the Age of Genomic Medicine

Jonghoe Byun*

Department of Molecular Biology, BK21 graduate program for 
RNA Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology, 
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Korea
2)
Abstract
The convergence of molecular and genetic disciplines with 
non-invasive imaging technologies has provided an oppor-
tunity for earlier detection of disease processes which begin 
with molecular and cellular abnormalities. This emerging 
field, known as molecular imaging, is a relatively new dis-
cipline that has been rapidly developed over the past decade. 
It endeavors to construct a visual representation, character-
ization, and quantification of biological processes at the mo-
lecular and cellular level within living organisms. One of the 
goals of molecular imaging is to translate our expanding 
knowledge of molecular biology and genomic sciences into 
good patient care. The practice of molecular imaging is still 
largely experimental, and only limited clinical success has 
been achieved. However, it is anticipated that molecular 
imaging will move increasingly out of the research laboratory 
and into the clinic over the next decade. Non-invasive in vivo 
molecular imaging makes use of nuclear, magnetic reso-
nance, and in vivo optical imaging systems. Recently, an inter-
est in Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been re-
vived, and along with optical imaging systems PET is assum-
ing new, important roles in molecular genetic imaging studies. 
Current PET molecular imaging strategies mostly rely on the 
detection of probe accumulation directly related to the physi-
ology or the level of reporter gene expression. PET imaging 
of both endogenous and exogenous gene expression can be 
achieved in animals using reporter constructs and radio-
labeled probes. As increasing numbers of genetic markers 
become available for imaging targets, it is anticipated that a 
better understanding of genomics will contribute to the ad-
vancement of the molecular genetic imaging field. In this re-
port, the principles of non-invasive molecular genetic imag-
ing, its applications and future directions are discussed.

Keywords: molecular  genetic  imaging,  reporter  gene 
imaging, probe, PET, genomics

*Corresponding author: E-mail jonghoe@dankook.ac.kr
Tel +82-2-799-1141, Fax +82-2-793-0176
Accepted 24 May 2007

Introduction 
All  human  characteristics  depend  on  a  myriad  of 
biochemical reactions that occur many millions of times per 
minute  within  the  cells  and  tissues  of  the  body.  An 
unbalanced biochemical process can lead to diseases 
which  exhibit  structural  abnormalities.  Conventional 
imaging techniques have mostly relied on nonspecific 
macroscopic anatomical changes to detect pathological 
changes in tissues. In contrast, molecular imaging allows 
for identification of specific molecular events which can 
cause disease. This is a significant change in the imaging 
paradigm because earlier detection, characterization, and 
monitoring  of  treatment  procedures  can  be  achieved 
easily. The advent of molecular imaging is largely due to 
the  recent  convergence  of  molecular  and  genetic 
disciplines, and non-invasive imaging technologies that 
have established new standards for biomedical practice.
Molecular imaging offers distinct advantages when 
compared to in vitro tissue culture studies or in vivo animal 
experiments.  It  allows  for  the  non-invasive,  repetitive 
imaging  of  targeted  macromolecules  and  biological 
processes in a quantitative manner in living organisms 
(Massoud et al., 2007). This is an extremely powerful tool 
with numerous applications including evaluation of gene 
therapy,  stem  cell  tracking  studies,  monitoring  of 
endogenous gene expression, screening of transgenic 
animals, integrative biology, risk stratification, and drug 
discovery.  One  of  the  most  exciting  aspects  of  this 
emerging  field  is  that  real-time  imaging  of  molecular- 
genetic  processes  can  be  made  within  the  inherent 
spatial-resolution limits of existing imaging systems.

Advances in the design of imaging devices have also 
been crucial in the development of molecular imaging 
technologies. Over the past few decades, there have been 
huge advances in imaging devices such as nuclear (PET, 
Single Photon Emission Tomography [SPECT], gamma 
camera), magnetic resonance, and in vivo optical imaging 
systems. Coupled with these improvements, sophistication 
of non-invasive imaging strategies has enabled better 
spatial and real-time visualization of normal and abnormal 
cellular  processes  at  the  molecular  and  genetic  level. 
Non-invasive imaging of molecular-genetic and cellular 
processes will undoubtedly complement established ex 
vivo  molecular-biological  assays  that  require  tissue 
sampling. These will provide spatial as well as temporal 
elements  to  our  understanding  of  various  diseases 

(Blasberg et al., 2002). This article will review the current 
status of molecular genetic imaging technologies, their 
applications and potential, with a focus on reporter gene 
imaging and the PET system.

Definition of Molecular Imaging 
Molecular imaging is a growing research area aimed at 
developing  and  testing  novel  tools,  reagents,  and 
methods to image specific molecular pathways in vivo, 
particularly  those  that  are  key  targets  in  disease 
processes. In contrast to classical diagnostic imaging, 
molecular imaging probes the molecular abnormalities 
that are the basis of disease rather than imaging the 
result of these molecular alterations. Molecular imaging 
can be defined as the visualization and quantification 
of biological processes at the molecular and cellular 
levels within intact living organisms (Massoud et al., 
2003). Alternatively, it can be defined as the minimally 
invasive in vivo sensing, depiction, and characterization 
of spatially localized biologic processes at the cellular 
and molecular levels (Britz-Cunningham et al., 2003). 
In a broader sense, molecular imaging encompasses 
non-invasive visualization of the molecular processes 
of life in organisms ranging in complexity from individual 
cells to human beings. Defined from a different perspective, 
molecular imaging is the combination of new molecular 
agents with traditional imaging tools to capture pictures 
of specific molecular pathways in the body, particularly 
those that are key targets in disease processes. 

Imaging Strategy
Recent progress in our understanding of the molecular 
and genetic mechanisms of disease has ushered in the 
age of molecular genomic medicine together with the 
application of diverse biologically-oriented therapeutics. 
New gene-based therapies are providing control over 
the level, timing, and duration of transgene expression, 
and non-invasive imaging modalities are proving to be 
useful tools in treating patients using such therapies. 
Indeed,  non-invasive  imaging  of  molecular  genetic 
events will accelerate the development of molecular 
therapies that can lead to more effective treatment.

Currently, there are three different imaging strategies: 
direct, indirect and surrogate approaches (Blasberg et al., 
2003). Direct strategies are used by all three (nuclear, MR, 
and optical) imaging modalities. For example, monoclonal 
antibody (mAb)- or peptide-specific targeting of a particular 
cell membrane epitope can be imaged with a paramagnetic, 
fluorescent, or radionuclide-labeled probe. Imaging of cell 
surface-specific antigens or epitopes with radiolabeled 

Molecular Genetic Imaging 47

antibodies is an example of direct molecular imaging that 
has been developed over the past 30 years. Similarly, PET 
imaging of receptor density or occupancy using small 
radiolabeled molecular probes has been widely used in 
neuroscience research over the past two decades. These 
examples represent some of the first molecular imaging 
applications used in clinical nuclear medicine research. 
Other examples of direct-imaging paradigms that use 
radiolabeled analogues of naturally occurring compounds, 
such as 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) to image 
glucose utilization in the brain, have been used extensively 
in the past. FDG PET imaging of glucose utilization is based 
largely on the activity of the enzyme hexokinase and was 
described three decades ago (Sokoloff et al., 1977; Revich 
et al., 1977). Similarly, imaging of the activity of a particular 
transporter  with  a  transport-specific  probe  has  been 
described previously, and has been used to generate 
images of tumors (Haberkorn, 2001; Miyagawa, 1998).
A more recent direct-imaging strategy involves the use 
of  antisense  oligonucleotide  and  aptamer  as  in  vivo 
diagnostic agents. Antisense oligonucleotides target gene 
expression at the RNA level, while aptamer oligonucleotides 
are designed to detect proteins of interest. Since these 
nucleotide  probes  can  specifically  hybridize  to  target 
mRNA or proteins in vivo, they enable molecular imaging 
at the level of gene expression. In principle, they could 
potentially target any specific mRNA or DNA sequence 
within the genome. In this context, imaging of specific 
mRNAs using radiolabeled antisense oligonucleotides or 
aptamers  can  produce  direct  images  of  specific 
molecular-genetic events. Some success for the imaging 
of endogenous gene expression using PET has also been 
reported (Tavitan et al., 1998; Cong et al., 2005).

Despite the advantages of direct-imaging strategies, 
they are constrained by the necessity to develop specific 
probes for each molecular target, and then to validate both 
the sensitivity and specificity for the application of each 
newly  developed  probe-target 
imaging  paradigm 
(Blasberg et al., 2003). This can be very time-consuming 
and costly as has been demonstrated in the case of FDG 
PET imaging of glucose utilization in tumors which took 
over 20 years to develop, validate, and obtain regulatory 
approval.  Nevertheless,  this  traditional  approach  will 
continue to be used to develop new probes for imaging 
specific  molecular-genetic  targets  using  radiolabeled, 
paramagnetic, or fluorescent small molecular probes. In 
addition to these direct imaging strategies, indirect and 
surrogate approaches are also being used. However, the 
most current in vivo molecular genetic imaging strategies 
are indirect and involve the coupling of a reporter gene with 
a complementary reporter probe.

48 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 46-55, June 2007

Reporter Gene Imaging
Indirect imaging strategies involve the coupling of a re-
porter gene with a complementary reporter probe such as 
FHBG ([18]F-9-(4-fluoro-3-hydroxymethyl- butyl)guanine) 
and FIAU ([124]I-2'-fluoro-2'-deoxy-1-beta-d-beta-arabinofur-
anosyl- 5-iodouracil) (Fig. 1). Imaging the level of probe ac-
cumulation provides indirect information related to the lev-
el of reporter gene expression. Reporter gene imaging can 
provide a molecular and biologic approach to assess ge-
netic and cellular therapies. Reporter genes have been 
used  to  track  the  progress  of  patients  with  cancer 
(Penuelas et al., 2005; Jacobs et al., 2001) and to image 
viral gene transfer to the heart in rats and pigs (Bengel et 
al., 2003). The technique of reporter gene imaging involves 
introduction of the reporter gene and its expression by a 
constitutively active promoter or tissue-specific promoter. 
The expressed reporter proteins then produce a quantifi-
able signal when exposed to a specific imaging probe. 
Reporter gene technology has a number of advantages 
over direct labeling of cells with imaging agents (Chun et 
al., 2007). Firstly, reporter gene imaging requires cellular 
viability.  Direct  labeling  of  cells  does  not  discriminate 
cellular viability, as signals may still be present after cell 
death owing to local accumulation. Reporter gene expression 
can be constitutive leading to continuous transcription, can 

be used to identify the site of transduction, and to monitor 
the level and duration of gene expression. Alternatively, 
reporter genes can be made inducible, enabling controlled 
gene expression. Gene expression can be made tissue or 
condition-specific (Lee et al., 2006) and/or responsive to 
the  level  of  endogenous  promoters  and  transcription 
factors. Inducible promoters can also be used as sensors 
to regulate the magnitude of reporter gene expression, and 
can be used to provide information about endogenous cell 
processes. Reporter systems can also be constructed to 
monitor mRNA stabilization and specific protein-protein 
interactions. Secondly, reporter imaging can be performed 
repeatedly at later time points without being limited by the 
half-life of the labeling agents. In fact, the reporter probe 
can be injected on a daily or weekly basis to investigate 
the physiologic state of the cells expressing the reporter 
genes. Thirdly, if the reporter genes are integrated into the 
chromosomal structure and passed on to subsequent 
generations of cells, daughter cells can be tracked with 
equal  efficiency  as  the  parental  cells.  Fourthly,  using 
recombinant DNA technologies, various promoters and 
reporter genes can be combined to create a construct that 
expresses multiple genes. Such a construct could be 
engineered not only to assess cellular viability, but also to 
determine cellular differentiation via the use of tissue- 

Fig. 1. Chemical Structures of FHBG and FIAU. These pictures were taken from a database of chemical molecules (PubChem, 
National  Center  for  Biotechnology  Information).  FHBG:  2-amino-9-[3-(fluoromethyl)-4-hydroxy-butyl]-3H-purin-6-one,  FIAU: 
1-[(2R,3S,4R,5R)-3-fluoro-4-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)oxolan-2-yl]-5-iodo-pyrimidine-2,4-dione.

Molecular Genetic Imaging 49

Fig. 2. Schematic for imaging herpes simplex virus type 1-thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk) reporter gene expression with reporter 
probes FHBG and FIAU. The HSV1-tk gene is transfected into target cells by a gene delivery vector. Inside the transfected cell, the 
HSV1-tk gene is transcribed to HSV1-tk mRNA and then translated to the HSV1-tk enzyme. After administration of a radiolabelled 
probe  ([18F]-FHBG  or  [124I]-FIAU)  and  its  transport  into  the  cell,  the  probe  is  phosphorylated  by  HSV1-tk  enzyme.  The 
phosphorylated radiolabelled probe does not readily cross the cell membrane and remains “trapped” inside the cell, generating a 
signal in microPET. Thus, the magnitude of probe accumulation in the cell (level of radioactivity) reflects the level of HSV1-tk 
enzyme activity and the level of HSV1-tk gene expression.

specific promoters.

Two  well-established  examples  of  reporter  gene 
assays  are  herpes  simplex  virus  thymidine  kinase 
(HSV-tk)-based PET imaging (Fig. 2) and firefly luciferase 
(Fluc)-based  optical  bioluminescence  imaging.  PET 
imaging using the HSV-tk reporter protein has been widely 
used with a number of radiolabeled thymidine analogs 
(Gambhir et al., 2000; Tjuvajev et al., 2002). Bioluminescence 
imaging using the Fluc reporter protein is based on the 
oxidation of the D-luciferin reporter probe to generate 
low-energy photons. The signal is emitted from the cell 
through  the  tissue  and  detected  using  ultra-sensitive 
charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras. More recently, a 
human-derived  intrinsically  non-immunogenic  reporter 
gene, the human mitochondrial thymidine kinase type 2 
(hTK2) reporter gene, was evaluated for PET imaging 
applications (Ponomarev et al., 2007). The implication of 
human-derived  reporter  genes  is  that  they  may  be 
non-immunogenic and therefore potentially allow long- 
erm monitoring of different molecular- genetic processes 
by  nuclear  imaging  techniques  in  humans.  Using  a 
well-characterized radiotracer such as [124]I-FIAU, it should 
be possible to image human reporter gene expression with 
PET in preclinical and clinical studies.

Despite these advantages, reporter gene imaging still 
has several limitations. An ideal gene delivery system that 
enables  target-specific  stable  expression  must  be 
developed. Moreover, the safety of vectors in relation to 
potential  adverse  effects  and  cytotoxicity  must  be 
guaranteed before such therapies can be used in clinical 
practice. Reporter gene imaging studies will be limited in 
human  subjects,  because  each  new  vector  requires 
extensive  and  time-consuming  safety  testing  before 
regulatory approval for human administration. Similarly, 
radiolabeled probes for existing and new reporter systems, 
and the probes being developed for new direct imaging 
paradigms, will also require safety testing and regulatory 
approval. Therefore, the translation of molecular genetic 
imaging research from animal proof-of-principle experiments 
into patient studies and the subsequent clinical application 
of these imaging paradigms will need to be developed with 
careful monitoring. Nevertheless, the use of the reporter 
gene imaging strategy is supported by clinical studies 
using adenoviral-mediated gene transfer of HSV-tk into 
patients with glioblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma 
for PET imaging (Penuelas et al., 2005; Jacobs et al., 
2001).

50 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 46-55, June 2007

Protein-Protein Interactions
Protein-protein interactions regulate a variety of cellular 
functions, including cell cycle progression, signal transduction, 
and metabolic pathways. On a whole organism scale, 
protein-protein interactions regulate signals that affect 
overall homeostasis, patterns of development, normal 
physiology, and disease in living animals. In addition, 
protein-protein interactions have considerable potential 
as therapeutic targets. However, compared with in vitro 
studies of protein interactions in cultured cells, in vivo 
investigation  of  protein-protein  interactions  in  living 
organisms impose even greater constraints on reporter 
systems and detection mechanisms.

Most strategies for detecting protein-protein interactions 
are based on fusion of a pair of interacting molecules to 
the defined protein elements to reconstitute a biological or 

biochemical function. The two-hybrid system is the most 
widely applied method used to identify and characterize 
protein interactions (Parrish et al., 2006). Another method 
that is attractive for in vivo imaging of protein interactions 
is  ‘protein  fragment  complementation  (PFC)’  (Fig.  3). 
Variations of recruitment systems such as Ras recruitment 
(Stagljar et al., 1998) and interaction trap have also been 
developed (Eyckerman et al., 2001). Recently, imaging 
using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) 
and bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) 
has been increasingly investigated.

Evidence has accumulated that the pathways of protein 
interactions in specific tissues produce regional effects 
that cannot be investigated fully with in vitro systems, and 
thus  there  is  considerable  interest  in  evaluating  protein 
interactions in live animals. The in vivo protein-protein 
interaction was demonstrated by a reporter gene imaging 

Fig. 3. General Features of Protein Fragment Complementation (PFC). (A) The gene encoding an enzyme can be transformed/ 
transfected into a host cell and its activity detected by an in vivo assay that can detect color, luminescence and fluorescence. (B) 
Oligomerization domains are fused to N- and C-terminal fragments of the enzyme gene. Upon co-transformation/transfection of the 
fusion genes, spontaneous or drug-induced association of oligomerization domains results in reconstitution of enzyme activity. 
Reassembly of enzyme will not occur unless the oligomerization domains interact.

strategy that employed id-gal4 and/or myoD-vp16 fusion 
genes driven by the NF-κB promoter responsive to TNF-α 
or by PET and fluorescence imaging using a variant of the 
HSV1-tk/GFP dual-reporter fusion gene (Ray et al., 2002; 
Luker et al., 2002). These initial results are very encouraging, 
but they are also limited, since they demonstrate only 
constitutive interactions of the known pairs of interacting 
proteins. Further studies will be required to validate the 
approach with respect to the sensitivity and dynamic range 
of these reporter systems for monitoring the induction and 
inhibition of endogenous protein-protein interactions.

Recently,  the  potential  of  molecular  imaging  for 
monitoring conditional gene activation and gene deletion 
in the cardiovascular system was reported (Chang et al., 
2007).  In  their  study,  a  silenced  PET  reporter  gene 
(HSV1-tk) carried in a replication-deficient adenovirus was 
conditionally activated in cardiac tissue using the Cre-loxP 
system and cardiac-specific promoters in living animals. 
Since the ability to switch transgenes on and off would be 
of paramount importance not only when the therapy is no 
longer needed, but also in the case of the development of 
adverse side effects to the therapy, development of such 
technologies 
for  monitoring  and  controlling  gene 
expression in vivo could provide significant benefits.

Two-Hybrid System
Two-hybrid  systems  exploit  the  modular  nature  of 
transcription factors, many of which can be separated into 
discrete DNA-binding and activation domains. Proteins of 
interest are expressed as fusion proteins with either a 
DNA-binding domain (BD) or activation domain (AD). If 
these hybrid proteins bind to each other as a result of 
interaction between the proteins of interest, the BD and AD 
domains are brought together within the cell nucleus and 
act as a transcription factor to drive expression of reporter 
gene. In the absence of specific interaction between the 
hybrids,  the  BD  and  AD  do  not  associate  and  no 
transcription occurs (von Mering et al., 2002).

 This two-hybrid system can be used to image protein 
interactions in living mice with positron emission tomography 
(PET) or bioluminescence imaging. Because the production 
of signal in this system requires nuclear localization of the 
hybrid proteins, membrane proteins cannot be studied in 
their intact state. Also, indirect readout of the reporter may 
limit kinetic analysis due to the time delay associated with 
both transcriptional activation of the reporter gene and 
decay of the reporter mRNA and proteins.

In another approach termed the cytokine receptor-based 
interaction trap, a signaling-deficient receptor provides a 
scaffold for the recruitment of interacting fusion proteins 
that phosphorylates endogenous STAT3. Activated STAT 

Molecular Genetic Imaging 51

complexes then drive a nuclear reporter (Eyckerman et al., 
2001). This system permits detection of both modification- 
independent and phosphorylation-dependent interactions 
in intact mammalian cells, but the transcriptional readout 
can limit kinetic analysis.

Protein Fragment Complementation
The protein fragment complementation (PFC) assay 
depends  on  the  division  of  a  monomeric  reporter 
enzyme into two separate inactive components that can 
reconstitute  function  upon  association  (Fig.  3).  To 
enable  this,  reporter  fragments  are  first  fused  to 
interacting proteins, which, upon association, brings 
together the separated reporter fragments and restores 
the enzymatic activity. Enzymes which can be used for 
PFC strategies include beta-galactosidase, dihydrofolate 
reductase  (DHFR),  beta-lactamase,  and  luciferase 
(luciferase complementation imaging [LCI]) (Rossi et 
al., 1999; Remy et al., 1999). A fundamental advantage 
of PFC is that the hybrid proteins directly reconstitute 
enzymatic activity of the reporter. Therefore, in principle, 
protein interactions could be detected in any subcellular 
compartments.  Also,  monitoring  in  real-time  of  the 
assembly of protein complexes may be possible.

A  disadvantage  of  the  PFC  approach  is  that 
reconstitution of enzyme activity may be susceptible to 
steric constraints imposed by the interacting proteins. 
Another  potential  limitation  is  that  the  amount  of 
reconstituted  enzyme  may  not  be  sufficient  for  non- 
invasive detection. However, this sensitivity problem may 
be  overcome  with  technological  developments  in  the 
detection system. Another aspect is that PFC systems can 
enhance the sensitivity of detection by potential amplification 
of the signals.

PET: A Versatile Imaging Modality
PET-based molecular genetic imaging in living organisms 
has enjoyed exceptional growth over the past 7 years. PET 
is a versatile tool for molecular genetic imaging since it can 
detect the biochemical changes accompanying genetic 
and  cellular  processes.  Although  structural  imaging 
techniques  such  as  computed  tomography  (CT)  and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offer excellent resolutions 
for visualization of anatomical changes, many diseases 
may already be in advanced stages by the time they are 
detected by MRI and CT. However, PET can detect the 
altered metabolism of disease and also provide highly 
accurate quantitative results as a functional molecular 
imaging technique.

52 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 46-55, June 2007

The enormous potential of PET for the investigation of 
various biological processes opens up new possibilities for 
basic research and everyday clinical practice. With its 
unique  ability  to  reveal  biochemical  and  physiological 
processes, PET can provide crucial information about 
numerous  diseases.  PET  imaging  radiotracers  are 
designed  to  provide  insights  about  healthy,  normal 
biology, the biological process of disease, and even the 
molecular errors that cause diseases. Radiotracers can 
even  interact  with  biological  processes  such  as  bone 
mineral  turnover  (Frost  et  al.,  2007)  and  glucose 
metabolism  in  various  organs.  One  of  the  primary 
applications of PET reporter gene imaging is likely to be 
the quantitative monitoring of transduction efficacy in gene 
therapy and animal research protocols by imaging of the 
location, extent, and duration of transgene expression.

Monitoring of cell trafficking, targeting, and replication 
in adoptive therapies, involving ex vivo transduction of 
harvested immune-competent cells and stem/progenitor 
cells will be another area for PET application. There are 
numerous examples of molecular imaging of the cells that 
are marked by the ex vivo gene transfer procedure and 
subsequently placed in living rodents. In one example, 
embryonic rat H9c2 cardiomyoblasts were transduced 
with an adenoviral vector containing the HSV1-sr39tk 
reporter gene, and injected into the myocardium (Inubushi 
et al., 2003). Since current methods for the analysis of 
cell-based  therapies  are  largely  restricted  to  invasive 
measurements  in  animal  models,  there  is  a  need  for 
alternative methods to monitor the movement and location 
of specific cell populations in vivo through the development 
of innovative, high-resolution cellular tracking techniques. 
Particular  emphasis  needs  to  be  placed  on  methods 
enabling  the  identification  and  characterization  of  cell 
mobilization, engraftment, and differentiation. Integration 
of emerging in vivo molecular genetic imaging capabilities 
with advances in stem cell biology will be required for 
effective  development  and  utilization  of  cell-based 
therapies. 

PET Tracers
The future success of PET imaging will largely depend on 
the discovery of novel radiopharmaceuticals that seek 
specific  molecular  and  genetic  targets,  the  design  of 
companion advanced scanners for creating meaningful 
images, and the new radiopharmaceutical treatments for 
intractable  diseases  including  cancers.  PET  uses 
radioisotopes of naturally occurring elements, such as 11C, 
13N,  and  15O,  in  order  to  perform  in  vivo  imaging  of 
biologically  active  molecules.  Although  there  are  no 
radioisotopes of hydrogen that can be used for PET, many 

(18F)  without  changing 

molecules can replace a hydrogen (or hydroxyl group) with 
Fluorine-18 
its  biological 
properties. Fluorine-18 can also be used as a substitute 
in fluorine-containing compounds such as 5-fluorouracil 
(5-FU) (Mintun et al., 1988). Most PET tracers utilize a 
radioisotope that has a short half-life and can be produced 
by a cyclotron. However, there are some radiotracers, 
such as copper-62, that can be manufactured in a nuclear 
generator. Radiopharmaceuticals are produced after the 
radioisotope has been generated and substituted into the 
compound of interest. Because of the short half-lives of 
most PET tracers, sequential scanning on the same day 
is not usually feasible.

Any biological function can be studied in vivo using ap-
propriately labeled PET tracer molecules. The concen-
tration of any PET tracer molecule should be significantly 
higher at the target sites than in the background. This al-
lows biological function to be measured by determining 
tracer concentration over a specified target tissue or organ 
region. For example, physiological processes such as oxy-
gen consumption, blood flow, and tissue metabolism can 
also be visualized in vivo using PET tracers. Receptors can 
be visualized and quantified by labeling receptor-binding 
ligands with PET tracers. New radiotracers based on mes-
senger RNA for dynamic imaging of gene expression can 
also be developed for use in animals in real time (de Vries 
et al., 2004).

At  present,  FDG  is  the  most  commonly  used 
positron-emitting radiotracer for PET imaging. FDG is a 
radioactive analog of glucose, and is able to detect altered 
glucose  metabolism  in  pathological  processes.  Like 
glucose, FDG is transported into cells by means of a 
glucose  transporter  protein  and  begins  to  follow  the 
glycolytic pathway. FDG is subsequently phosphorylated 
by  hexokinase  to  form  FDG-6-phosphate,  which  then 
cannot continue through glycolysis because it is not a 
substrate for glucose-6-phosphate isomerase. FDG-6- 
phosphate is therefore trapped biochemically within the 
cell. This process of metabolic trapping constitutes the 
basis of PET imaging using FDG. Because there may be 
a substantial increase or decrease in glucose metabolism 
in diseased tissues, such differences can be visualized 
using FDG PET.

Future Directions for PET Imaging
As more information about the relationship between genes 
and diseases is discovered, new molecular targets for 
imaging  the  biological  activity  of  diseases  will  be 
elucidated. In the age of genomic medicine, drugs may be 
custom made for individual patients based on their genetic 
makeup (pharmacogenomics), and nuclear medicine will 

play  a  crucial  role  in  this  pursuit.  Since  mice  can  be 
engineered biologically to carry genes that cause disease, 
novel molecular probes coupled with microPET may allow 
the imaging of disease initiation and progression in a living 
mouse. In concert with this trend, highly sophisticated 
drugs are likely to be designed to correct the molecular 
errors of disease. Combined with the explosive growth of 
knowledge from genome research, PET imaging could 
play a major role in the promising new era of molecular 
medicine. In the near future, PET may become the critical 
modality  for  diagnosing  a  variety  of  diseases  and  for 
selecting appropriate treatments when disease processes 
are still at the molecular level. With further development 
and  validation,  PET  imaging  for  examining  gene 
expression, signal transduction, and cellular metabolism 
may move into the clinical realm in the not-so-distant future.

imaging 

in  vivo 

Multi-modality Imaging
The  convergence  of  different  imaging  modalities  is 
creating new opportunities for molecular genetic imaging. 
Multi-modality,  non-invasive 
is 
increasingly being used in molecular genetic studies, and 
will soon become the standard approach for reporter gene 
imaging  studies  in  small  animals.  With  this  trend, 
multidisciplinary  efforts  from  molecular  and  cellular 
biology, chemistry, bioinformatics, physics, engineering, 
and many clinical areas are becoming united. For example, 
the  coupling  of  nuclear  and  optical  reporter  genes 
represents the beginning of a far wider application of 
multi-modality imaging in molecular genetic studies being 
performed  in  small  animals.  Optical  reporter  imaging 
systems have the advantage of cost effectiveness and 
time efficiency. Moreover, they require less resources and 
space than PET or MRI and are particularly well suited for 
small animal imaging and for in vitro assays to validate 
different  reporter  systems.  However,  optical  imaging 
techniques do not currently provide optimal quantitative or 
tomographic information because they are limited by depth 
of light penetration and scatter. These issues are not 
limiting for PET- or MRI-based reporter systems, and PET- 
and MRI-based animal studies are more easily converted 
to human applications (Blasberg, 2003).  Many of the 
shortcomings of each modality alone can be overcome by 
the use of dual- or triple-modality reporter constructs that 
incorporate the advantage of each imaging modality.

Conclusions and Future Perspective 
The  emerging  field  of  molecular  genetic  imaging  is 
providing new opportunities for visualizing and quantifying 

Molecular Genetic Imaging 53

the biology of living organisms. To reach such goals all the 
major disciplines and imaging modalities must cooperate 
with  this  new  field,  each  with  its  own  mechanism  for 
generating contrast, spatial resolution, and specificity. If 
molecular imaging can be broadly defined as the in vivo 
characterization and measurement of biologic processes 
at the molecular and cellular level, efforts such as the 
development  of  novel  probes,  signal  amplification 
strategies, and imaging technologies clearly fit together 
with prior research efforts in the imaging field.

Future success of molecular genetic imaging will be 
facilitated  by  bringing  the  imaging  disciplines  closer 
together as can be seen in the complementary benefits of 
dual-modality reporters that incorporate both PET and 
optical imaging technology. Complementary instrumentation 
for imaging both animals and patients provides a unique 
opportunity for translational research. Animals bearing 
transduced  xenografts  that  contain  specific  reporter 
constructs, and animals transduced with viral vectors that 
bear these reporter constructs, currently provide the main 
resource for further advances in non-invasive molecular 
genetic  imaging  research.  Transgenic  animals  that 
express reporter constructs in a system-wide manner, or 
selectively in certain organs or cell types in the adult 
organism  or  during  a  particular  phase  of  embryonic 
development, are the subject of active current research. 
Non-invasive  molecular  genetic  imaging  can  assist  in 
these studies by assessing the activation or suppression 
of specific endogenous genes, and the activity of specific 
signal transduction pathways and specific protein-protein 
interactions.  This  information  could  prove  useful  in 
defining  and  monitoring  cell  transformation  to  a  more 
malignant state, or determining whether a specific drug 
effectively targets a specific signal transduction pathway.
For the time being, basic science investigations and 
preclinical research will be a mainstay of the molecular 
genetic imaging field. But an eye towards the design of 
clinical translational research will be necessary to ensure 
successful  integration  and  practical  use  of  molecular 
genetic imaging. As imaging schemes are growing more 
sophisticated, more precise genetic markers are needed 
to study more subtle forms of cancer progression and other 
diseases. Anatomic localization will become increasingly 
important  as  more  biologically-targeted  tracers  are 
introduced. Thus, there will be an increasing need for 
hybrid or fusion imaging modalities such as PET-MRI. 
Consistent with these trends, the use of radio-, optical, and 
other forms of biological tracers or contrast agents to 
diagnose  disease  and  assess  efficacy  of  novel 
therapeutics is likely to grow in the next decade. More 
importantly, improvements in molecular target selection, 
probe developments, and imaging instrumentation will 

54 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(2) 46-55, June 2007

remain crucial issues together with collaborative efforts 
between  basic  scientists,  clinicians,  and  industry  to 
optimize device design, and to identify new applications. 
In conclusion, in the age of genomic medicine and systems 
biology  approaches  to  disease  complexity,  molecular 
genetic imaging promises to change the clinical landscape 
of future medicine by providing predictive, preventative, 
and personalized medicine.

Acknowledgements

The present research was conducted by the research 
fund of Dankook University in 2006.

References
Bengel, F.M., Anton, M., Richter, T., Simoes, M.V., Haubner, 
R., Henke, J., Erhardt, W., Reder, S., Lehner, T., Brandau, 
W., Boekstegers, P., Nekolla, S.G., Gansbacher, B., and 
Schwaiger, M. (2003). Noninvasive imaging of transgene 
expression by use of positron emission tomography in a 
pig model of myocardial gene transfer. Circulation 108, 
2127-2133.

Blasberg, R.G. (2003). In vivo molecular-genetic imaging: 
multi-modality nuclear and optical combinations. Nucl. 
Med. Biol. 30, 879-888.

Blasberg,  R.G.  and  Tjuvajev,  J.G.  (2002). 

In  vivo 
molecular-genetic imaging. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppl. 39, 
172-183.

Blasberg, R.G. and Tjuvajev, J.G. (2003). Molecular-genetic 
imaging: current and future perspectives. J. Clin. Invest. 
111, 1620-1629 

Britz-Cunningham,  S.H.  and  Adelstein,  S.J.  (2003). 
Molecular  targeting  with  radionuclides:  state  of  the 
science. J. Nucl. Med. 44, 1945-1961.

Chang, G.Y., Cao, F., Krishnan, M., Huang, M., Li, Z., Xie, X., 
Sheikh, A.Y., Hoyt, G., Robbins, R.C., Hsiai, T., Schneider, 
M.D., and Wu, J.C. (2007). Positron emission tomography 
imaging of conditional gene activation in the heart. J. Mol. 
Cell. Cardiol. [Epub ahead of print] doi:10.1016/j.yjmcc. 
2007.03.809

Chun, H.J., Wilson, K.O., Huang, M., and Wu, J.C. (2007). 
Integration  of  genomics,  proteomics,  and  imaging  for 
cardiac stem cell therapy. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 
[Epub ahead of print] doi:10.1007/s00259-007-0437-y

Cong,  X.  and  Nilsen-Hamilton,  M.  (2005).  Allosteric 
targeted  reversibly  attenuated  probes. 

aptamers: 
Biochemistry 44, 7945-7954. 

De Vries, E.F., Vroegh, J., Dijkstra, G., Moshage, H., Elsinga, 
P.H., Jansen, P.L., and Vaalburg, W. (2004). Synthesis 
and  evaluation  of  a  fluorine-18  labeled  antisense 

oligonucleotide as a potential PET tracer for iNOS mRNA 
expression. Nucl. Med. Biol. 31, 605-612.

Eyckerman, S., Verhee, A., der Heyden, J.V., Lemmens, I., 
Ostade,  X.V.,  Vandekerckhove,  J.,  and  Tavernier,  J. 
(2001). Design and application of a cytokine-receptor- 
based interaction trap. Nat. Cell. Biol. 3, 1114-1119.

Frost, M.L., Cook, G.J., Blake, G.M., Marsden, .P.K., and 
Fogelman, I. (2007). The relationship between regional 
bone  turnover  measured  using  18F-fluoride  positron 
emission tomography and changes in BMD is equivalent 
to that seen for biochemical markers of bone turnover. J. 
Clin. Densitom. 10, 46-54.

Gambhir, S.S., Herschman, H.R., Cherry, S.R., Barrio, J.R., 
Satyamurthy,  N.,  Toyokuni,  T.,  Phelps,  M.E.,  Larson, 
S.M., Balatoni, J., Finn, R., Sadelain, M., Tjuvajev, J., and 
Blasberg, R. (2000). Imaging transgene expression with 
radionuclide imaging technologies. Neoplasia 2, 118-138.
Haberkorn,  U.  (2001).Gene  therapy  with  sodium/iodide 
symporter  in  hepatocarcinoma.  Exp.  Clin.  Endocrinol. 
Diabetes. 1, 60-62.

Inubushi,  M.,  Wu,  J.C.,  Gambhir,  S.S.,  Sundaresan,  G., 
Satyamurthy, N., Namavari, M., Yee, S., Barrio, J.R., 
Stout, D., Chatziioannou, A.F., Wu, L., and Schelbert, H.R. 
(2003).  Positron-emission  tomography  reporter  gene 
expression imaging in rat myocardium. Circulation 107, 
326-332.

Jacobs, A., Voges, J., Reszka, R., Lercher, M., Gossmann, 
A., Kracht, L., Kaestle, C., Wagner, R., Wienhard, K., and 
Heiss, W.D. (2001). Positron-emission tomography of 
vector-mediated  gene  expression  in  gene  therapy  for 
gliomas. Lancet 358, 727-729.

Lee, J.Y., Lee, Y.S., Kim, J.M., Kim, K.L., Lee, J.S., Jang, H.S., 
Shin, I.S., Suh, W., Jeon, E.S., Byun, J., and Kim, D.K. 
(2006). A novel chimeric promoter that is highly responsive 
to hypoxia and metals. Gene Ther. 13, 857-868.

Luker, G.D., Sharma, V., Pica, C.M., Dahlheimer, J.L., Li, W., 
Ochesky,  J.,  Ryan,  C.E.,  Piwnica-Worms,  H.,  and 
Piwnica-Worms,  D.  (2002).  Noninvasive  imaging  of 
protein-protein interactions in living animals. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U S A 99, 6961-6966.

Massoud, T.F. and Gambhir, S.S. (2003). Molecular imaging 
fundamental  biological 

in 
processes in a new light. Genes Dev. 17, 545-580.

living  subjects:  seeing 

Massoud,  T.F.  and  Gambhir,  S.S.  (2007).  Integrating 
noninvasive molecular imaging into molecular medicine: 
an evolving paradigm. Trends. Mol. Med. 13, 183-191.
Mintun,  M.A.,  Welch,  M.J.,  Siegel,  B.A.,  Mathias,  C.J., 
Brodack, J.W., McGuire, A.H., and Katzenellenbogen, 
J.A.  (1988).  Breast  cancer:  PET  imaging  of  estrogen 
receptors. Radiology 169, 45-48.

Miyagawa, T., Oku, T., Uehara, H., Desai, R., Beattie, B., 
Tjuvajev, J., and Blasberg, R. (1998). "Facilitated" amino 

acid transport is up-regulated in brain tumors. J. Cereb. 
Blood Flow Metab. 18, 500-509.

Parrish, J.R., Gulyas, K.D., and Finley, R.L. (2006). Yeast 
two-hybrid contributions to interactome mapping. Curr. 
Opin. Biotechnol. 17, 387-393.

Penuelas,  I.,  Mazzolini,  G.,  Boan,  J.F.,  Sangro,  B., 
Marti-Climent, J., Ruiz, M., Ruiz, J., Satyamurthy, N., Qian, 
C., Barrio, J.R., Phelps, M.E., Richter, J.A., Gambhir, S.S., 
and  Prieto,  J.  (2005).  Positron  emission  tomography 
imaging of adenoviral-mediated transgene expression in 
liver cancer patients. Gastroenterology 128, 1787-1795.
Ponomarev, V., Doubrovin, M., Shavrin, A., Serganova, I., 
Beresten, T., Ageyeva, L., Cai, C., Balatoni, J., Alauddin, 
M., and Gelovani, J. (2007). A Human-Derived Reporter 
Gene for Noninvasive Imaging in Humans: Mitochondrial 
Thymidine Kinase Type 2. J. Nucl. Med. 48, 819-826.

Ray, P., Pimenta, H., Paulmurugan, R., Berger, F., Phelps, 
M.E., Iyer, M., and Gambhir, S.S. (2002). Noninvasive 
quantitative  imaging  of  protein-protein  interactions  in 
living subjects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 99, 3105-3110.
Reivich, M., Kuhl, D., Wolf, A., Greenberg, J., Phelps, M., Ido, 
T., Casella, V., Fowler, J., Gallagher, B., Hoffman, E., 
Alavi, A., and Sokoloff, L. (1977). Measurement of local 
cerebral glucose metabolism in man with 18F-2-fluoro- 
2-deoxy-  d-glucose.  Acta.  Neurol.  Scand.  Suppl.  64, 
190-191.

Remy,  I.  and   Michnick,  S.W.  (2007).  Application  of 
protein-fragment complementation assays in cell biology. 
Biotechniques 42, 137-141.

Molecular Genetic Imaging 55

Rossi, F., Charlton, C.A., and Blau, H.M. (1997). Monitoring 
protein-protein interactions in intact eukaryotic cells by 
beta-galactosidase complementation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U S A 94, 8405-8410.

Sokoloff, L., Reivich, M., Kennedy, C., Des Rosiers, M.H., 
Patlak,  C.S.,  Pettigrew,  K.D.,  Sakurada,  O.,  and 
Shinohara, M. (1977). The [14C]deoxyglucose method for 
the measurement of local cerebral glucose utilization: 
theory, procedure, and normal values in the conscious and 
anesthetized albino rat. J. Neurochem. 28, 897-916.

Stagljar, I., Korostensky, C., Johnsson, N., and te Heesen, 
S. (1998). A genetic system based on split-ubiquitin for the 
analysis of interactions between membrane proteins in 
vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 95, 5187-5192.

Tavitian,  B.,  Terrazzino,  S.,  Kuhnast,  B.,  Marzabal,  S., 
Stettler, O., Dolle, F., Deverre, J.R., Jobert, A., Hinnen, F., 
Bendriem,  B.,  Crouzel,  C.,  and  Di  Giamberardino,  L. 
(1998). In vivo imaging of oligonucleotides with positron 
emission tomography. Nat. Med. 4, 467-471.

Tjuvajev, J.G., Doubrovin, M., Akhurst, T., Cai, S., Balatoni, 
J., Alauddin, M.M., Finn, R., Bornmann, W., Thaler, H., 
Conti, P.S., and Blasberg, R.G. (2002). Comparison of 
radiolabelled  nucleoside  probes  (FIAU,  FHBG,  and 
FHPG) for PET imaging of HSV1-tk gene expression. J. 
Nucl. Med. 43, 1072-1083.

von Mering, C., Krause, R., Snel, B., Cornell, M., Oliver, S.G., 
Fields, S., and Bork, P. (2002). Comparative assessment 
of large-scale data sets of protein-protein interactions. 
Nature 417, 399-403.

