30  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1) 24-29, March 2005 

Supervised Model for Identifying Differentially Expressed 
Genes in DNA Microarray Gene Expression Dataset Using 
Biological Pathway Information 

Tae Su Chung1•2,  Keewon Kim1 and Ju Han Kim1,2* 

1Seoul  National  University  Biomedical  Informatics 
(SNUBI),  2Human  Genome  Research  Institute,  Seoul 
National  University  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  11 0-799, 
Korea 

Abstract 
Microarray technology makes it possible to measure the 
expressions of tens of thousands of genes simultaneously 
under various experimental conditions. Identifying differentially 
expressed genes in each single experimental condition 
is one of the most common first steps in microarray gene 
expression data analysis. Reasonable choices of thresholds 
for determining differentially expressed genes are used 
for the next-step-analysis with suitable statistical significances. 
We  present  a  supervised  model  for  identifying  DEGs 
using pathway information based on the global connectivity 
structure.  Pathway  information  can  be  regarded  as  a 
collection of biological  knowledge, thus we are trying to 
determine the optimal threshold so that the consequential 
connectivity structure can  be the  most compatible with 
the existing pathway information. The significant feature 
of our model  is that it uses established knowledge as a 
reference to determine the direction of analyzing microarray 
dataset.  In  the  most  of  previous  work,  only  intrinsic 
information  in  the  miroarray  is  used  for  the  identifying 
DEGs.  We  hope  that  our  proposed  method  could 
contribute to construct biologically meaningful structure 
from microarray datasets. 

Keywords:  biological  pathway,  differentially  expressed 
gene, graph theory,  DNA microarray, gene expression 

Introduction 
Microa.rray expression datasets are incessantly accumulated 
with the aid of recent technological advances. It is widely 
believed that biological meaningful interpretation can be 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail  juhan@snu.ac.kr, 
Tel  +82-2-740-8320, Fax +82-2-747-4830 
Accepted  30 January 2005 

extracted from these large-scale data, using suitable and 
well-organized methods of analysis. Identifying differentially 
expressed genes in  each single experimental condition 
is common first step for the DNA microarray data analysis. 
Newton  eta/.  (Newton  eta/.,  2001)  suggested  the 
probability model to estimate the significant changes of 
each probe,  considering  not only its expression  ratio of 
two channels but also its variance and mean intensity of 
two channels. To give significant genes that discriminate 
given groups of experimental conditions,  lyer eta/ (lyer 
et  a/.,  1999)  and  DeRisi  et  a/.  (DeRisi  et  a/.,  1997) 
discussed  methods  choosing  genes  that  have  big 
fold-changes, with suitable threshold, over their base line 
expressions.  Also  several  probability approaches  have 
been proposed to detect differentially expressed genes. 
(Tusher  eta/.,  2001;  Hunter  eta/., 2001;  Dudoit  eta/., 
2002;  Efron and Tibshirani, 2002; Zhao and Pan, 2002) 
But all these methods, in practical use, need to select the 
optimal  threshold  determining  differentially  expressed 
genes. 

On the other hands, recently there are many attempt 
to lead a new insight by combining multiple types of data. 
(Yamanishi  et  a/,.  2004;  Kharchenko  et  a/.,  2004) 
Yamanishi  et  a/.  uses  kernel  method  to  predict  new 
gene-to-gene  interaction within  metabolic  pathway and 
bases  it  on  known  pathway  knowledge  by  adopting 
supervised 
from  microarray 
expression data. Kharchenko eta/. compares established 
metabolic network with expression profiles to find genes 
that  can  complete  a  metabolic  pathway  with  some 
participants missed. 

information  acquired 

In  this  paper,  we  present  a  supervised  model  for 
identifying  differentially  expressed  genes 
in  each 
condition  by  taking  optimal  threshold  using  pathway 
information  based  on  the  global  connectivity structure. 
Pathway information can be regarded as a collection of 
biological knowledge, thus we are trying to determine the 
optimal threshold so that the consequential connectivity 
structure can  be the  most compatible with  the  existing 
pathway  information.  Most  of  previous  models  that 
shared with our goal used only intrinsic information in the 
miroarray expression data. The significant feature of our 
model  is  that  it  uses  established  knowledge  as  a 
reference  to  determine  the  direction  of  analyzing 

Identifying Differentially Expression Genes Using Biological Pathway  31 

paper,  we  find  optimal  thresholds in  the  sense that the 
resulting secondary graph structure is most similar to the 
graph constructed from pathway knowledge. 

KEGG  (Kyoto Encyclopedia of genes and genomes) 
database  (Kanehisa,  1996)  is  taken  as  the  source  of 
pathway knowledge.  Note that it provides 88  biological 
pathways  including  84  metabolic  pathways  and  4 
regulatory  pathways.  Among  these  88  pathways,  we 
select  43  pathways  that  include  12  or  more  genes  to 
avoid  the  perturbation  caused  by  scarcity  of  basis 
knowledge.  KEGG  database  presents  a  pathway  with 
participating genes and relations between them. 

In constructing 43 pathway graphs from the information, 
we make a node for each gene and link a pair of nodes 
when they are assigned one of the relations listed above. 
Merging these 43 pathways graphs,  we build the single 
pathway  graph  of  570  genes  as  nodes,  which  will  be 
used as a template to determine DEGs. 

The global compatibility between two graphs 
Here we  introduce  the  notion  of  compatibility  between 
two graphs,  in  the general context of graph theory. The 
geodesic distanced (g, h : G)  between two nodes g and h 
is  defined  by  the  length  of  shortest  path  between  two 
nodes  in  the  graph  G.  This  distance  represents  the 
global  structure of graph.  (Chatrand  eta/.,  1998)  If two 
graphs G1  and G2  are  constructed  on  the same set of 
nodes, then the geodesic distance of two graphs can be 
easily  extended  by  the  average  of  differences  of  all 
geodesic distances of all  pairs of nodes in  each  graph, 
i.e. 

. . ... • 

T'"  b 

(Q 

.·::· .... / 

• 

ia 

e 

E 

~ 

C"'"t 

l  \:.~ ......... . 

(~ 

, 

: 

microarray dataset. We hope that our proposed method 
could  contribute  to  construct  biologically  meaningful 
structure from microarray data sets. 

Methods 
Graph structure as a common template structure 
In  order  to  compare  structures  of  two  heterogeneous 
types of data, microarray expression data and biological 
pathway  data,  we  introduce  the  common  template 
structure,  a  graph,  which 
interactive 
information of genes from two sources of data. 

involves  the 

We  use the  Rosetta  compendium  dataset  (Hugh  et 
a/., 2000), which is hitherto the most systematic approach 
to  profile  yeast  genes,  as  a  source  of  microarray 
expression data to analysis. The dataset is consisted of 
300  microarray  experiment  results,  which  contain  287 
diverse  gene  mutations  and  13  chemical  treatments. 
They all cover 6,153 genes in each microarray data. The 
log-expression  ratio  values  are  used  as  entries  of 
expression  matrix,  and these values are normalized so 
that mean and standard deviation of each column are 0 
and 1,  respectively. 

to 

trying 

In  each  experiment,  we  are 

identify 
differentially  expressed  genes  (or  DEGs),  which  are 
usually  determined  by  genes whose  expression  levels 
(or  its  suitable  statistics)  exceed  some  threshold.  We 
here  note  that  once  DEGs  are  determined,  the  graph 
structure on  the whole  genes is naturally introduced  by 
linking  co-differentially  expressed  genes.  Here  by 
co-differently  expressed  genes we  mean  that  they  are 
DEGs  under  the  same  experimental  condition.  In  this 

(A) 

(B) 

!.  •....  • 

.~ .K ~,><~ 
; . . .......... . 

c 

c 

: 

' 

. 

a 
r - -
1 

1 

2 

3 

b 
c 

d 

e 

b 

2 

1 

2 

c 
1  1 d 
2  I 1  I e 

b 

c 

d 

e 

a 
, -
1 

1 

5 

5 

b 

2 

5 

5 

c 

5  1  d 
5  I 1  I e 

a 
..--
1 

1 

2 

3 

b 
c 

d 

e 

b 

2 

1 

2 

c 

3  1  d 

4  I 1  I e 

a 
,---
1 
1 

1 
2 

b 
c 

d 
e 

b 

1 

1 

2 

c 

2  1  d 

s  1  1 J e 

Comp(A.  B)  = 0.6 

Comp(A, C)  = 0.9 

Comp(A.  D)  = 0.875 

Fig.  1.  Compatibilities between pathway graph and various graphs from microarray data: (A) is the pathway graph 
and (8)-(D) are graphs from microarray data with various thresholds.  Triangular tables represent geodesic 
distances in graph (A) and subgraph of (8)-(D), respectively. 

32  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1) 30-34, March 2005 

~ld(g, h;G1 )  -d(g, h;G2 )1 
dist(G1,  G2 )  =  ---n'(n-----=-I')/.2-;:---

where  the  summation  is  taken  over  all  pairs  (g,  h)  of 
nodes and n is the number of common set of nodes. We 
here  note  that  it  is  symmetric  and  satisfies  triangle 
inequality (Chatrand eta/., 1998). 

the  Rosetta  compendium  dataset  by 

Let  GP  be  the  pathway graph  obtained  from  KEGG 
pathway database.  And  let  GM be  a graph  constructed 
linking 
from 
co-differentially  expressed  genes.  The  threshold  e is 
used to determine DEGs in each condition, i.e., a gene 
pair (g,h) is linked in the graph GM  if the absolute value of 
normalized log-ratios of expressions in g and hare both 
greater than  e.  Then the compatibility Comp( Gp,  GM)  is 
obtained by 

Camp (Gp,  GM)  =  1- dist ( GMI Gp)/(n-l) 

Here n is the number of genes in Gp, and GM! GP is the 
relative subgraph of GM to Gp.  Since the pathway graph 
Gp contains only subset of genes that are described in 
graph  GM,  it is  natural to compare  Gp and subgraph  of 
GM.  It is clear that the compatibility lies between 0 and 1 
and  it  becomes  1  only  when  the  graph  GM  includes 
exactly same structure of Gp. 

The  effect  of  the  optimization  on  compatibility  is 
illustrated  in  Fig.  1.  In  the  figure,  (B),  (C)  and  (D)  are 
possible  graphs  from  microarray  dataset  by  taking 
different  threshold  determining  DEGs.  And  (A)  is  the 
pathway  graph  which  will  be  used  as  a  reference  to 
select one  graph from  (B),  (C)  and  (D).  By calculating 
compatibilities, which  represents the global similarity of 
graph  structures,  we  can  take  the  threshold  used  in 
constructing graph (B) as the optimal one. 

Results 
Correlation of micrarray data and pathway 
knowledge 
We  try  to  determine  DEGs  in  each  experimental 
condition  of  microarray  expression  data  based  on  the 
template structure of pathway knowledge. The underlying 
assumption of our approach is that pathway knowledge 
can  be  conjectured  from  microarray  data,  or  that 
microarray data reflect the biological pathway knowledge. 
We  investigate  the  validity  of  this  assumption  by 
investigating  the  correlation  between  co-degree  in 
microarray expression data and relations within pathways. 
The co-degree of gene pair (g,h) with parameter e is 
defined by the number of conditions satisfying that both g 

and h become DEGs simultaneously under the condition 
with  respect to the threshold  e . Based on the pathway 
information, however, we can categorize gene pairs into 
three  classes:  The  first  class  comprises  gene  pairs  in 
which  two  genes  belong  to  the  pathway  and  are 
connected by a specific biological  relation. The second 
class comprises gene pairs whose genes belong to the 
pathway  but  are  not  related  by any biological  relation. 
The third one is comprises gene pairs whose genes are 
outside  the  pathway.  For  these  three  classes,  we 
calculate the average of co-degrees as a correlation  of 
microarray data and pathway knowledge. 

We naturally expected that the  average co-degrees 
on gene pairs in the first class is bigger than that of the 
second  class,  and  that  of  the  third  class  the  smallest 
value.  Fig.  2  shows  the  result  which  agrees  with  our 
expectation  and so we  validate  that there  is  a  positive 
correlation between the relational information of pathway 
information and microarray data. 

Differentially  expressed  genes  in  the  Rosetta 
compendium dataset 
Applying our model to rosetta compendium dataset, we 
find  the  optimal  threshold  determining  DEGs  in  whole 
300 conditions. To do this, we first let Gp be the pathway 
graph obtained from  KEGG  pathway database and  GM 
be  a  graph  constructed  from  the  rosetta  compendium 
dataset  by  linking  co-differentially  expressed  genes, 
where differentially expressed  genes in  each  condition 
are determined by a predefined threshold. The compatibility 
plot  via  various  thresholds  is  provided  in  Fig.  3.  The 
compatibilities  in  the  figure  are  calculated  with  two 
graphs  Gp  and  GM  . The  shape  of the  curve  is  nearly 
uni-peaked, so there is no doubt about selecting threshold 
in  the peak as the optimal  one.  Actually,  we just adapt 
simple greed algorithm to find optimal threshold  1.4926 
under the  restriction  that  the  threshold  is  independent 
from conditions for the simplicity of algorithm. 

Correlation between microarray data and pathway inforamtion 

edged gene pair 

-
---- non--edged gene pair 
-·-·  ··  gene pair ouside the pathway 

1.0 

1.2 

1.4 

1.6 

1.8 

2.0 

thresholds 

Fig.  2.  O:lrrelation beMeen nicroorray data ard pati"May inforrration 

Identifying Differentially Expression Genes Using Biological Pathway  33 

Compatibilities via thresholds 

_r;;=:;=:;::;::E;:::::::.e:::::~ ~\ - - ,  

12-
~0 
:0 
-
~ 
~ ~-
0  0 
() 
-
,._ 
&J_ 

I 
1.~ 

T 
1.~ 

I 
1.~ 

I 
1.~ 

L__--,-------,----r--____!~-::!!....----.-J 

0 

I 
1.~ 

I 
1.~ 

Fig. 3.  Compatibilities via threshold 

thresholds 

Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the number of DEGs in 
300  conditions  applying  the  optimal  threshold.  Among 
whole 6,153 yeast genes, we see that our model select 
about  10% of  genes  as  DEGs  in  each  condition.  This 
result  agrees  with  the  common  criterion  which  can  be 
found in many biological literatures. 

Discussion 
In  the  present  paper,  we  suggest  a  novel  model  to 
identify differentially expressed genes in each conditions 
of a microarray dataset. The procedure is one of the first 
steps  of  analyzing  expression  profiles.  The  significant 
feature  of  our  model 
is  that  it  uses  established 
knowledge  as a reference to determine the direction of 
analyzing  microarray  dataset  and  it  does  not  consider 
the individual  structure but consider the global  network 
structure  to  determine  DEGs  in  each  single  condition. 
And because of using information outside array,  it does 
not  need  any  assumptions  on  the  distributions  of 
expression  profiles.  We  also  investigate  the  validity  of 
our  basic  assumption  that  relational  information  in 
existing  pathway  knowledge  reflects  the  expression 
level, or moreover network structure of microarray data. 
Knowledge about pathways covers only small portion 
of genes that exist (Chung eta!., 2004). In case of yeast, 
less than 10% of the whole genes (i.e. -6,000) are found 
to  participate  in  some  known  pathways.  And  graph 
structure is too simple to use as a template structure to 
compare the  pathway  and  microarray data,  because  it 
ignore the orders and types of biological relations. These 
incompleteness  and  simplicity  may  give  insignificant 
results  of  our  model.  But  applying  other  biological 
information,  such  as  protein 
interaction  data  and 
relational information of genes or proteins from biological 
literature,  and  modifying  graph  structure  into  more 

Histogram of the number of DEGs 

in 300 conditions 

0 
00 

0 
\0 

0 

""" 

0 
N 

0 

;>, 

u .::: 
<1.) 
::> 
cr J: 

0 

200 

400 

600 

800 

number of DEGs 

Fig.  4.  Histogram of the number of DEGs in 300 conditions of 
the rosetta compendium datase 

complicated structure, we can overcome the problem of 
our current model. 

Acknowledgements 

This study was supported by a grant from Korea Health 
21  R&D Project,  Ministry of Health & Welfare,  Republic 
of Korea (0412-MI01-0416-0002). 

References 
Chartrand,  G.,  Kubicki,  G.,  and Schultz,  M.  (1998).  Graph 
similarity and distance in graphs. Aequationes Math. 55, 
129-145. 

Chung,  H.J.,  Kim,  M.,  Park,  C.H.,  Kim,  J.,  and  Kim,  J.H. 
(2004). ArrayXPath: mapping and visualizing microarray 
gene expression data with integrated biological pathway 
resources  using  Scalable  Vector  Graphics.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  32, W464-W464. 

DeRisi,  J.L.,  lyer, V.R.,  and Brown,  P.O.  (1997).  Exploring 
the metabolic and genetic control of gene expression as 
a genomic scale.  Science 278, 680-686. 

Dudoit,  S.,  Yang,  Y.H.,  Gallow,  M.J.,  and  Speed,  T.P. 
(2002).  Statistical  methods  for  identifying  differentially 
expressed  genes 
replicated  eDNA  microarray 
experiments.  Statistica Sinica 12,  111-139. 

in 

Efron,  B.  and  Tibshirani,  R.  (2002).  Empirical  Bayes 
methods  and  false  discovery  rates  for  microarrays. 
Genetic Epidemiology 23,  70-86. 

Farkas, 1., Jeong, H., Vicsek, T., Barabasi, A.-L., and Oltvai, 
Z.N.  (2003). The topology of the transcription regulatory 
network 
the  yeast,  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae. 
Physica A 318,  601-612. 

in 

Holme,  P.,  Huss,  M.,  and  Jeong,  H.  (2003).  Subnetwork 
hierarchies of biochemical pathways.  Bioinformatics 19, 
532-538. 

34  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 3(1) 30-34, March 2005 

Hughes,  T.R.,  Marton,  M.J.,  Jones,  A.R.,  Roberts,  C.J., 
Stoughton,  R.,  Armour, C.D., Bennett, H.A., Coffey,  E., 
Dai,  H.,  He,  Y.D.,  Kidd,  M.J.,  King,  A.M.,  Meyer,  M.R., 
Slade,  D.,  Lum,  P.Y.,  Stepaniants,  S.B.,  Shoemarker, 
D.O.,  Gachotte,  D.,  Chakraburtty,  K.,  Simon,  J.,  Bard, 
M.,  and Friend,  S.H. (2000).  Functional  Discovery via a 
Compendium of expression Profiles.  Ce//1 02,  1 09-126. 
Hunter, L., Taylor, R.C., Leach, S.M., and Simon, R. (2001). 
GEST: a gene expression search tool based on a novel 
Bayesian  similarity  metric.  Bioinformatics  17,  Suppl.1, 
S115-S122. 

lyer, V.R.,  Eisen,  M.B.,  Ross,  D.T.,  Schuler, G.,  Moore, T., 
Lee,  J.C.,  Trent,  J.M.,  Staudt,  L.M.,  Hudson,  J.  Jr, 
Boguski,  M.S.,  Lashkari,  D.,  Shalon,  D.,  Botstein,  D., 
and Brown  P.O.  (1999).  The transcriptional  program  in 
the  response  of  human  fibroblasts  to  serum.  Science 
83-87, 283. 

Kanehisa,  M.  (1996). Toward pathway engineering:  a new 
database of genetic and molecular pathways. Science & 
Technology Japan No. 59, pp. 34-38. 

Kanehisa,  M.  (2000).  Post-Genome  Informatics.  Oxford 

University Press. 

Kharcheko,  P.,  Vitkuo, D., and Church, G.M. (2004).  Filling 
in  a  metabolic  networks  using  expression 

gaps 
information.  Bioinformatics 20,  Suppl.  1 , 1178-1185. 

Newton, M.A., Kendziorski, C.M., Richmond, C.S., Blattner, 
F.R., and Tsui,  K.W.  (2001). On differential variability of 
expression  ratios:  improving  statistical  inference  about 

gene expression change from microarray data.  Journal 
of Computational Biology 8, 37-52. 

Qian, J.,  Lin, J.,  Luscombe,  N.M., Yu,  H.,  and Gerstein, M. 
(2003). Prediction of regulatory networks: genome-wide 
identification  of  transcription  factor  targets  from  gene 
expression data. Bioinformatics 19,  1917-1926. 

Rung,  J.,  Schlitt, T.,  Brazma,  A.,  Freivalds,  K.,  and Vila,  J. 
(2002).  Building  and  analysing  genome-wide  gene 
disruption  networks.  Bioinformatics  18,  Suppl.  2, 
S202-S210. 

Shmulevich,  I.  and Zhang,  W.  (2002).  Binary analysis and 
optimization-based  normalization  of  gene  expression 
data.  Bioinformatics 18, 555-565. 

lusher,  V.G.,  Tibshirani,  R.,  and  Chu,  G. 

(2001). 
Significance  analysis  of  microarrays  applied  to  the 
ionizing radiation response.  Proc.  Nat/.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 
98, 5116-5121. 

Wagner,  A.  (2001).  How  to  reconstruct  a  large  genetic 
network from n gene perturbations in fewer than n2 easy 
steps.  Bioinformatics 17, 1183-1197. 

Yamanishi,  Y.,  Vert,  J.P.,  Nakaya,  A.,  and  Kanehisa,  M. 
(2004). Protein network inference from multiple genomic 
data:  a supervised approach.  Bioinformatics 20,  Suppl. 
1' 1363-1370. 

Zhao,  Y.  and  Pan,  W.  (2003).  Modified  nonparametric 
approached to detecting differentially expressed genes 
in replicated microarray experiments. Bioinformatics 19, 
1046-1054. 

