APPLICATION NOTE
Genomics  &  Informatics
Vol.  9(4)  194-196,  December  2011

http://dx.doi.org/10.5808/GI.2011.9.4.194
pISSN 1598-866X eISSN 2234-0742

PromoterWizard:  An  Integrated  Promoter  Prediction  Program 
Using  Hybrid  Methods

Kiejung  Park1  and  Ki-Bong  Kim2*

1Division  of  Bio-Medical  informatics,  Centers  for  Genome 
Science,  Korea  National  Institute  of  Health,  Chung-
cheongbuk-do  363-951,  2Department  of  Biomedical 
Technology,  Sangmyung  University,  Cheonan  330-720, 
Korea

Abstract

Promoter  prediction  is  a  very  important  problem  and  is 
closely  related  to  the  main  problems  of  bioinformatics 
such  as  the  construction  of  gene  regulatory  networks 
and  gene  function  annotation.  In  this  context,  we  devel-
oped  an  integrated  promoter  prediction  program  using 
hybrid  methods,  PromoterWizard,  which  can  be  em-
ployed  to  detect  the  core  promoter  region  and  the  tran-
scription  start  site  (TSS)  in  vertebrate  genomic  DNA  se-
quences,  an  issue  of  obvious  importance  for  genome 
annotation  efforts.  PromoterWizard  consists  of  three 
main  modules  and  two  auxiliary  modules.  The  three 
main  modules  include  CDRM  (Composite  Dependency 
Reflecting  Model)  module,  SVM 
(Support  Vector 
Machine)  module,  and  ICM  (Interpolated  Context  Model) 
module.  The  two  auxiliary  modules  are  CpG  Island 
Detector  and  GCPlot  that  may  contribute  to  improving 
the  predictive  accuracy  of  the  three  main  modules  and 
facilitating  human  curator 
final 
annotation.

to  decide  on 

the 

Keywords:  regulatory  networks,  TSS,  CDRM,  SVM,  CpG 
Island  detector,  GCPlot

Availability:  Executable  file  of  this  program  is  available 
free  of  charge  for  non-commercial  use  only.  Contact  the 
corresponding  author.

Introduction

The  promoter  recognition  has  an  important  bearing  on 
the  elucidation  of  gene  regulation  which  is  one  of  the 
most  important  research  topics  in  molecular  biology,  but 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  kbkim@smu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-41-550-5377,  Fax  +82-41-550-5184
Received  16  November  2011,  Revised  1  December  2011, 
Accepted  2  December  2011

in  which  many  things  are  still  unclear.  It  is  therefore  im-
portant  to  exactly  find  the  regulatory  regions,  examine 
them  in  detail,  either  computationally  or  by  experiments, 
and  learn  the  mechanisms  that  control  the  expression  of 
genes.  The  first  description  of  common  patterns  in  eu-
karyotic  promoters,  in  the  form  of  weight  matrices  which 
are  equivalent  to  linear  hidden  Markov  models,  can  be 
found  in  the  ground-breaking  publication  by  Bucher 
(Bucher,  1990).  Depending  on  the  goals,  computational 
approaches  which  deal  with  promoters  can  be  divided 
into  two  classes:  the  general  recognition  of  promoters 
and  the  analysis  of  these  regions  to  identify  the  regu-
latory  elements  in  them  (or specific  promoter  recognition 
methods).  The  primary  goal  for  the general  methods  is 
to  identify  TSS  and/or  core  promoter  elements  for  all 
genes  in  the  genome;  the  specific  methods  focus  on 
identifying  specific  regulatory  elements  (TF  sites)  that 
are  shared  by  a  particular  set  of  transcriptionally  related 
genes. Specific  methods  can  have  very  high  specificity 
when  searching  against  the  whole  genome  and  can  pro-
vide  immediate  functional  clues  to  the  downstream  gene. 
On  the  other  hand,  because  of  their  broad  coverage,  the 
general  methods  are  extremely  useful  for  large-scale  ge-
nome  annotation.
    From  the  annotation  point  of  view,  promoter  identi-
fication  can  help  gene  finding  algorithms  to  identify  the 
5'  UTRs  that  can  span  up  to  tens  of  thousands  of  kilo-
bases  and  to  determine  the  exact  5'  boundary  of  a 
gene.  In  most  cases,  gene  finding  algorithms  do  not  de-
termine  the  exact  5'  end  of  a  gene  since  5'  UTRs  have 
a  very  high  variation  in  length  and  do  not  show  sig-
nificant  statistical  properties.  In  this  respect,  to  facilitate 
genome  annotation  and  improve  the  predictive  accuracy 
in  terms  of  specificity,  we  developed  the  integrated  pro-
moter  prediction  program  using  hybrid  methods  which 
have  been  developed  separately  in  our  previous  works. 
The  program,  PromoterWizard,  consists  of  three  main 
modules  and  two  auxiliary  modules  (Kim  and  Park, 
2004;  Kim,  2007;  Kim,  2010).

Features  and  Results

PromoterWizard  is  composed  of  three  main  modules 
and  two  auxiliary  modules.  Three  main  modules  are 
CDRM  (Composite  Dependency  Reflecting  Model)  mod-
ule,  SVM  (Support  Vector  Machine)  module,  and  ICM 
(Interpolated  Context  Model)  module.  The  CDRM  ac-
tually  represents  a  combination  of  first-,  second-,  third- 

Promoter  Prediction  Using  Hybrid  Methods 195

and  even  much  higher  order  or  long-range  depend-
encies  obtained  using  the  maximal  dependency  decom-
position  (MDD)  procedure,  which  iteratively  decomposes 
data  sets  into  subsets  on  the  basis  of  dependency  de-
gree  and  pattern  inherent  in  the  target  promoter  region 
to  be  modeled.  In  addition,  decomposed  subsets  are 
modeled  by  using  a  first-order  Markov  model,  allowing 
the  predictive  model  to  reflect  the  dependency  between 
adjacent  positions  explicitly  (Kim  and  Park,  2004).  The 
ICM  is  essentially  a  probabilistic  decision  tree,  i.e.  a 
sparse  probability  distribution  expressed  as  a  decision 
tree.  The  tree  construction  is  identical  to  constructing 
classification  trees  using  information  gain  as  the  splitting 
criteria  (Quinlan,  1993).  Classification  trees  associate  a 
class  label  with  each  leaf  node  of  the  tree.  The  labels 
in  our  case  are  the  four  nucleotide  values,  and  our  ICM 
determines  a  probability  distribution  for  the  base  to  be 
predicted  given  the  context  in  which  it  occurs.  Probabil-

(http://svmlight.joachims.org/) 

istic  decision  trees  have  been  designed  for  other  appli-
cations  (Delcher et al.,  1999).  The  SVM  is  a  supervised 
learning  method  used  for  classification  and  regression 
analysis.  Here  we  employed  the  polynomial  kernel  func-
tion  of  SVMlight 
(Kim, 
2007).  Two  auxiliary  modules  are  CpG  Island  Detector 
and  GCPlot.  CpG  Island  Detector  can  be  used  for  CpG 
islands  determination  and  GCPlot  can  give  a  clue  to 
discriminating  the  promoter  and  coding  regions  from  in-
tron  sequences.  These  two  modules  were  brought  in 
PromoterWizard  to  facilitate  the  end  user  to  discriminate 
CpG  island-associated  promoter  from  non-CpG  island 
associated  promoter.
    PromoterWizard  is  the  window-based  JAVA  applica-
tion  implemented  with  JBuilder  9.0  which  is  a  JAVA  IDE 
(Integrated  Development  Environment).  Window-based 
graphical  user  interface  enables  users  to  change  the 
preset  default  parameter  values  into  the  ones  tailored  to 

Fig.  1.  (a)  Window-based  graphical  user  interface  of  PromoterWizard.  The  left  frame  consists  of  two  parts  -  analysis  environ-
ment  and  analysis  result.  Each  provides  the  information  on  input  sequence  files  and  the  summary  of  the  analysis  result 
respectively.  The  right  frame  displays  CpG  islands  (top),  G+C%  plot  (middle),  and  promoters  (bottom).  (b)  Pop-up  windows
of  various  parameters  setting  for  analysis  optimization.  (c)  Pop-up  window  displays  all  the  promoters  detected  by  three  differ-
ent  methods  separately.  This  window  will  show  up  by  double-clicking  on  the  corresponding  promoter  of  main  screen.

196 Genomics  &  Informatics Vol.  9(4)  194-196,  December  2011

their  analysis  intent  (Fig.  1).  In  addition,  the  user  can  get 
the  summary  of  analysis  result  on  the  left  frame  of 
graphical  user  interface  which  comprises  two  parts  such 
as  analysis  environment  and  analysis  result.  The  analy-
sis  environment  part  provides  the  information  on  input 
sequence  files  and  the  analysis  result  part  furnishes 
users  with  the  information  on  sequence  name,  sequence 
length,  number  of  CpG  islands,  number  of  hit  pro-
moters,  maximum  value  of  G+C%,  minimum  value  of 
G+C%,  and  input  sequence  data.  The  user  can  get  the 
graphical  analysis  result  on  the  right  frame  of  graphical 
user  interface,  which  displays  CpG  islands  (top),  G+C% 
plot  (middle),  and  promoters  (bottom)  (Fig.  1a).  Users 
can  get  the  detailed  information  on  the  corresponding 
CpG  island  or  promoter  through  pop-up  window  which 
will  appear  by  double-clicking  on  it.  In  case  of  pro-
moter,  the  pop-up  window  looks  like  the  one  in  Fig. 
1c.The  pop-up  window  displays  all  the  promoters  de-
tected  by  three  different  methods  separately.  The  pro-
moters  displayed  on  the  main  screen  are  the  output  of 
logical  product  between  CDRM,  ICM,  and  SVM,  the  op-
tion  of  which  can  be  specified  through  the  menu 
'Analysis  Method'.

Discussion

The  important  part  of  computer-based  annotation  and 
analysis  is  concerned  with  regulatory  DNA  regions  - 
parts  of  the  sequence  that  have  influence  on  how  and 
when  a  gene  is  activated  or  expressed.  Our  approach 
belongs  to  general  promoter  prediction  methods,  the 
primary  goal  for  which  is  to  identify  TSS  and  core  pro-
moter  region  for  all  protein-coding  genes  in  a  genome 
instead  of  seeking  specific  regulatory  elements.  Accor-
ding  to  our  previous  works,  the  sensitivity  of  CDRM, 
SVM,  and  ICM  was  0.87,  0.86,  and  0.71  respectively.  In 
addition,  the  specificity  of  those  methods  was  0.72, 

0.69,  and  0.64  respectively.  The  result  shows  that  spe-
cificity  is  relatively  much  lower  than  sensitivity.  In  this 
respect,  in  order  to  improve  the  specificity  and  to  bring 
end-users  promoter  analyses  tailored  to  their  intent,  we 
developed  an  integrated  promoter  prediction  program 
using  hybrid  methods.  It  was  implemented  in  JAVA  and 
consists  of  three  main  modules  (CDRM,  SVM,  ICM)  and 
two  auxiliary  modules 
Island  Detector  and 
GCPlot).  Each  module  can  play  a  complementary  role  in 
improving  the  overall  predictive  performance  and  facili-
tating  human  curator  to  decide  on  the  final  annotation 
in  terms  of  promoter  determination.

(CpG 

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  Sangmyung  University.

References

Bucher,  P. 

(1990).  Weight  Matrix  Description  of  Four 
Eukaryotic  RNA  Polymerase  II  Promoter  Elements  Derived 
from  502  Unrelated  Promoter  Sequences.  J. Mol. Biol. 
212,  563-578.

Delcher,  A.L.,  Harmon,  D.,  Kasif,  S.,  White,  O.,  and  Salz-
berg,  S.  (1999).  Improved  Microbial  Gene  Identification 
with  GLIMMER.  Nucleic Acids Res.  27,  4636-4641.

Kim,  K.B.  and  Park,  S.H.  (2004).  Composite  Dependency- 
Reflecting  Model 
in 
Vertebrate  Genomic  DNA  Sequences.  J. Biochem. Mol. 
Biol.  37,  648-656.

for  Core  Promoter  Recognition 

Kim,  K.B.  (2007).  A  Study  on  the  Application  Methods  of  a 
Support  Vector  Machine  for  Gene  Promoter  Prediction. J. 
Life Sci.  17,  714-718.

Kim,  K.B.  (2010).  CpG  Islands  Detector:  a  Window-based 
CpG  Island  Search  Tool. Genomics&Informatics  8,  58-61.
Quinlan,  J.R.  (1993).  Programs for Machine Learning  (San 

Matero:  Morgan  Kaufman  Publishers).

