Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  231-234,  December  2008

Comparison  of  Normalization  Methods  for  Defining  Copy 
Number Variation Using Whole-genome SNP Genotyping Data

Ji-Hong  Kim1,2,  Seon-Hee  Yim2,  Yong-Bok 
Jeong1,2,  Seong-Hyun  Jung1,2,  Hai-Dong  Xu1,2, 
Seung-Hun  Shin1,2  and  Yeun-Jun  Chung1,2*

1Integrated  Research  Center  for  Genome  Polymorphism, 
2Department  of  Microbiology,  The  Catholic  University  of 
Korea,  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  137-701,  Korea

Abstract

Precise  and  reliable  identification  of  CNV  is  still  im-
portant  to  fully  understand  the  effect  of  CNV  on  genetic 
diversity  and  background  of  complex  diseases.  SNP 
marker  has  been  used  frequently  to  detect  CNVs,  but 
the  analysis  of  SNP  chip  data  for  identifying  CNV  has 
not  been  well  established.  We  compared  various  nor-
malization  methods  for  CNV  analysis  and  suggest  opti-
mal  normalization  procedure  for  reliable  CNV  call.  Four 
normal  Koreans  and  NA10851  HapMap  male  samples 
were  genotyped  using  Affymetrix  Genome-Wide  Human 
SNP  array  5.0.  We  evaluated  the  effect  of  median  and 
quantile  normalization  to  find  the  optimal  normalization 
for  CNV  detection  based  on  SNP  array  data.  We  also 
explored  the  effect  of  Robust  Multichip  Average  (RMA) 
background  correction  for  each  normalization  process. 
In  total,  the  following  4  combinations  of  normalization 
were  tried:  1)  Median  normalization  without  RMA  back-
ground  correction,  2)  Quantile  normalization  without 
RMA  background  correction,  3)  Median  normalization 
with  RMA  background  correction,  and  4)  Quantile  nor-
malization  with  RMA  background  correction.  CNV  was 
called  using  SW-ARRAY  algorithm.  We  applied  4  differ-
ent  combinations  of  normalization  and  compared  the  ef-
fect  using  intensity  ratio  profile,  box  plot,  and  MA  plot. 
When  we  applied  median  and  quantile  normalizations 
without  RMA  background  correction,  both  methods 
showed  similar  normalization  effect  and  the  final  CNV 
calls  were  also  similar  in  terms  of  number  and  size.  In 
both  median  and  quantile  normalizations,  RMA  back-
ground  correction  resulted  in  widening  the  range  of  in-
tensity  ratio  distribution,  which  may  suggest  that  RMA 
background  correction  may  help  to  detect  more  CNVs 
compared  to  no  correction.

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yejun@catholic.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-590-1214,  Fax  +82-2-596-8969
Accepted  1  December  2008
JHK  and  SHY  contributed  equally  to  this  paper.

Keywords:  copy  number  variation,  normalization,  SNP, 
Robust  Multiarray  Average

Introduction

A  wide  spectrum  of  genomic  variation  is  present  in  the 
human  genome,  from  single  nucleotide  polymorphisms 
(SNP)  to  microscopically  visible,  large  structural  altera-
tions.  Recently,  the  presence  of  large-scale  genomic 
variation,  named  copy  number  variation  (CNVs),  was  un-
covered  (Iafrate  et al.,  2004;  Sebat  et al.,  2004).  Since 
the  discovery,  widespread  presence  of  DNA  structural 
variation  in  phenotypically  normal  individuals  has  been 
well  known  (Kim  et al.,  2008).  Accumulating  evidence 
suggests  CNV  is  not  just  inter-individual  variation  con-
tributing  to  diversity  of  phenotypes  in  human  beings,  but 
also  very  likely  to  associate  with  various  human  dis-
eases  (Estivill  &  Armengol  2007;  McCarroll  &  Altshuler 
2007).  Therefore  precise  and  reliable  identification  of 
CNV  is  still  important  to  fully  understand  the  effect  of 
CNV  on  genome  diversity  and  background  of  complex 
diseases. 
    For  defining  CNV  accurately,  resolution  is  one  of  the 
important  issues.  When  CNV  was  first  uncovered,  ap-
proximately  12  CNVs  per  genome  were 
identified 
through  both  BAC  array  and  oligoarray  (Iafrate  et al., 
2004;  Sebat et al.,  2004).  In  2006,  Affymetrix  GeneChip 
Human  Mapping  500K  early  access  version  was  applied 
to  define  the  CNVs  from  269  HapMap  individuals 
(Redon  et al.,  2006).  In  that  study,  ∼1500  CNVs  were 
identified  and  the  median  size  of  them  was  smaller  (80 
Kb)  than  those  defined  by  tiling  BAC  array  (230  Kb).  In 
addition  to  SNP-based  CNV  analysis,  recent  higher  res-
olution  oligoarray  platforms  were  introduced  and  re-
vealed  that  the  human  genome  may  contain  more  CNVs 
than  previously  thought  and  that  the  average  size  of 
CNVs  might  be  smaller  than  previously  reported  (de 
Smith  et al.,  2007;  Perry  et al.,  2008). 
    In  spite  of  advance  of  new  technologies,  SNP  marker 
has  been  used  frequently  to  detect  CNVs  because  of 
several  advantages.  First,  due  to  large  number  of  known 
SNP  resources,  extremely  high  resolution  SNP  genotyp-
ing  chips  (＞1  Million)  can  be  designed  and  currently 
available.  Secondly,  accompanying  SNP  genotype  in-
formation  is  useful  for  disease  association  study  and 
CNV-SNP  combined  interpretation  can  achieve  new 
breakthrough  in  understanding  genetic  contribution  to 

232    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  231-234,  December  2008

the  complex  diseases.  But,  the  analysis  of  SNP  chip  da-
ta  for  identifying  CNV  has  not  been  well  established.  For 
example,  for  CNV  detection,  signal  intensities,  instead  of 
genotype,  are  used,  which  requires  a  normalization 
process  to  remove  systemic  errors  due  to  experimental 
conditions  ranging  from  the  array  manufacturing  process 
to  the  quantification  of  the  spot  intensities.  Since  there 
are  various  normalization  procedures  available  which 
can  produce  different  results,  it  is  important  to  under-
stand  the  basic  characteristics  of  various  methods  be-
fore  applying  to  the  data.  In  this  study,  we  compared 
various  normalization  methods  for  Affymetrix  SNP  array 
5.0  data  for  CNV  analysis  and  suggest  optimal  normal-
ization  procedure  for  reliable  CNV  call.

4  combinations  of  normalization  were  tried;  1)  Median 
normalization  without  RMA  background  correction,  2) 
Quantile  normalization  without  RMA  background  correc-
tion,  3)  Median  normalization  with  RMA  background  cor-
rection,  and  4)  Quantile  normalization  with  RMA  back-
ground  correction.

SW-ARRAY  analysis

CNV  was  called  based  on  log2  test/reference  ratio  using 
SW-ARRAY  algorithm  (Price et al.,  2005).  We  used  me-
dian  value＋2.5  MAD  (median  absolute  deviation)  and 
the  cutoff  of  island  score  was  ＞1  MAD  and  a  threshold 
of  six  consecutive  probes  for  calling  CNVs.

Methods

Study  subjects

Four  normal  Koreans  (K1-4)  and  NA10851  HapMap  male 
samples  were  genotyped  using  Affymetrix  Genome-Wide 
Human  SNP  array  5.0.  NA10851  DNA  was  purchased 
from  Coriell  Institute  for  Medical  Research  (Camden, 
NJ).  Genomic  DNA  was  extracted  from  blood  by  using 
Genomic  DNA  prep  kit  (SolGent,  Daejeon,  Korea).  DNA 
was  used  for  hybridization  after  quantification  and  qual-
ity  check.

Pre-processing  SNP  array  data 

Hybridization  was  performed  according  to  manufac-
turer’s  instructions.  Affymetrix  Genome-Wide  Human 
SNP  array  5.0  platforms  use  single-color  detection  sys-
tem  in  which  one  sample  is  hybridized  per  chip. 
Therefore,  normalization  of  this  platform  data  is  per-
formed  between  arrays.  Among  perfect  match  (PM)  and 
mismatch  (MM)  probes,  only  PM  probe  intensity  data 
were  used  for  CNV  analysis.  Before  applying  normal-
ization  procedures,  we  performed  allele  correction,  sum-
marization,  and  background  correction  using  the  soft-
ware  provided  by  Affymetrix.

Comparing  four  different  normalization  methods

There  are  several  approaches  to  normalize  systemic  var-
iation  of  microarray  data.  We  evaluated  the  effect  of 
median  and  quantile  normalization  to  find  the  optimal 
normalization  for  CNV  detection  based  on  SNP  array 
data.  We  also  explored  the  effect  of  Robust  Multichip 
Average  (RMA)  background  correction  on  each  normal-
ization  process.  It  uses  the  PM  distribution  to  get  an 
overall  background  level,  and  transforms  values  based 
on  the  background  noise  and  signal.  In  total,  following 

Fig.  1.  Comparison  of  the  effect  of  different  normalizations. 
(A)  Rraw  intensity  ratio  values  of  Chromosome  13  from  one 
of  four  normal  Koreans  before  normalization.  Intensity  ratios 
deviate  asymmetrically  from  zero  on  a  log2  scale.  B-E,  the 
intensity  ratio  profile  normalized  by  (B)  median  normal-
ization,  (C)  median  normalization  with  RMA  background  cor-
rection,  (D)  quantile  normalization  and  (E)  quantile  normal-
ization  with  RMA  background  correction  on  the  same 
sample.

Results

Comparing  the  effect  of  different  normalizations

Fig.  1A  illustrates  the  example  of  intensity  ratio  plot 
where  intensity  ratios  deviate  asymmetrically  from  zero 
on  a  log2  scale.  If  CNVs  will  be  defined  using  this  raw 
data,  there  must  be  substantial  amount  of  false  CNV 
calls.  We  applied  4  different  combinations  of  normal-
ization  and  compared  the  effect.  As  illustrated  in  Fig.  1B
∼E,  the  intensity  ratios  were  shifted  toward  the  horizon-
tal  zero  line.  The  plots  of  median  (Fig.  1B)  and  quantile 
(Fig.  1C)  normalized  data  (without  RMA  background  cor-
rection)  showed  the  similar  effect.  Most  of  the  intensity 
values  are  around  zero  on  a  log2  scale  and  range  of  in-
tensity  values  was  tight,  mostly  within  ±2  in  log2  scale. 
Interestingly,  RMA  background  correction  made  a  visible 
effect  on  the  data  (Fig.  1D  and  E).  Although  RMA  back-
ground  corrected  data  also  looked  well  normalized,  the 
ranges  of  intensity  values  (mostly  within  ±4  on  a  log2 
scale)  were  wider  than  those  without  background  cor-
rection  regardless  of  the  normalization  methods.
    When  we  observed  the  box  plot  showing  intensity  ra-
tio  distribution,  the  effects  of  normalization  and  RMA 

Fig.  2.  Box  plots  showing  the  distribution  of  intensity 
ratios.  (A)  Raw  intensity  ratios  before  normalization  of  4 
normal  Koreans.  (B)  Intensity  ratios  after  median  nor-
malization.  (C)  Intensity  ratios  after  median  normalization 
with  RMA  background  correction.

Normalization  Process  for  Defining  CNV    233

background  correction  were  similar  as  describe  above. 
Fig.  2  illustrates  the  examples  of  the  effect  of  median 
normalization  with  and  without  RMA  background  correc-
tion.  Raw  data  before  normalization  of  the  4  Korean 
samples  were  highly  deviated  (Fig.  2A).  After  median 
normalization,  all  4  intensity  ratio  distributions  looked 
similar  centering  around  1  but  RMA  background  cor-
rected  data  showed  wider  range  of  intensity  ratio  dis-
tribution  than  the  data  without  being  RMA  corrected 
(Fig.  2B  and  C). 
    We  also  used  the  MA  plot  to  visualize  the  effects  of 
normalization  (Fig.  3).  Raw  intensity  data  which  revealed 
a  deviation  from  expected  horizontal  zero  line  migrated 
to  horizontal  zero  line  after  applying  median  normal-
ization  (Fig.  3A,  B).  When  median  normalization  was 
performed  with  RMA  background  correction,  the  MA 
plot  showed  well-balanced  intensity  distribution  around 
zero,  but  the  range  of  intensity  ratios  was  larger  than 
those  of  median  normalization  only  (Fig.  3C).

Comparing  the  CNV  calls  between  different  nor-
malizations

We  then  observed  the  CNV  calls  using  SW-ARRAY  al-
gorithm  as  described  in  methods  from  the  data  which 
were  preprocessed  and  normalized  in  4  different  ways 
(Table  1).  Numbers  of  CNVs  identified  using  both  me-
dian  (n=26)  and  quantile  (n=29)  normalized  data  were 
similar  and  most  CNVs  identified  in  both  normalizations 
were  concordant,  96.2%  (25/26)  in  median;  86.2% 
(25/29)  in  quantile.  Mean  size  of  CNVs  identified  through 

Table  1.  Characters  of  the  CNVs  identified  by  4  different 
combinations  of  normalization

Normalizations

Gain

Loss

Total

Size  (Kb)

Median
Quantile
RMA-  Median
RMA-  Quantile 

19
19
95
83

7
10
64
44

26
29
159
127

10,9
12,2
19,0
20,6

intensity 

ratios. 

intensity; 

Fig.  3.  MA  plots  showing  the  dis-
tribution  of 
(A) 
(B)  after  median 
Raw 
normalization; 
(C)  after  median 
normalization  with  RMA  back-
ground  correction. 

234    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  231-234,  December  2008

quantile  normalization  (12.2  Kb)  was  slightly  bigger  than 
those  identified  through  median  normalization  (10.9  Kb). 
Interestingly,  more  CNVs  were  identified  in  RMA  back-
ground  corrected  data  than  in  those  without  background 
correction.  Mean  size  of  CNVs  from  both  median-RMA 
background  correction  and  quantile-RMA  background 
correction  was  approximately  20  Kb,  which  is  on  aver-
age  bigger  than  those  identified  without  background 
correction.  In  RMA  background  correction  based  nor-
malizations,  most  CNVs  identified  in  both  methods  were 
concordant,  79.9%  (127/159)  in  RMA-median;  100% 
(127/127)  in  RMA-quantile.  These  results  imply  that  the 
effect  of  median  and  quantile  normalizations  is  generally 
comparable  and  RMA  background  correction  may  help 
to  detect  more  CNVs  compared  to  without  correction.

Discussion

SNP  chip  based  CNV  analysis  is  now  one  of  the  most 
common  approaches  to  detect  CNV  with  higher  reso-
lution  CNV.  However,  due  to  the  fundamental  difference 
in  design  of  the  probes  which  were  not  designed  for 
measuring  the  signal  intensities  but  for  SNP  call,  data 
processing  including  normalization  for  defining  quantita-
tive  measurement  of  structural  variation  has  not  been 
well  established.  In  this  study,  we  compared  various 
normalization  methods  for  Affymetrix  SNP  array  5.0  data 
based  CNV  analysis  to  select  the  most  reliable  normal-
ization  methods. 
    When  we  applied  median  and  quantile  normalizations 
without  RMA  background  correction,  both  methods 
showed  similar  normalization  effect  and  final  CNV  calls 
were  also  similar  in  terms  of  number  and  size.  We  ap-
plied  RMA  background  correction  before  the  2  different 
normalizations.  In  both  median  and  quantile  normal-
izations,  RMA  background  correction  resulted  in  widen-
ing  the  range  of  intensity  ratio  distribution,  which  may 
explain  why  RMA  background  correction  plus  median  or 
quantile  normalization  combination  identified  approx-
imately  5  times  more  CNVs  than  without  RMA.  Average 
size  of  CNV  from  RMA  plus  normalization  combination 
(∼20  Kb)  was  slightly  bigger  than  that  from  normal-
ization  without  RMA  (∼12  Kb).  However,  both  sizes  are 
much  smaller  than  those  identified  through  Affymetrix 
500K  EA  (∼80  Kb)  (Redon  et al.,  2006).  RMA  back-
ground  correction  may  increase  the  sensitivity  in  detect-
ing  CNVs,  but  the  actual  sensitivity  should  be  estimated 
through  molecular  validation  of  identified  CNVs,  e.g. 
MLPA. 
    There  are  several  limitations  in  this  study.  First,  since 

we  focused  on  evaluating  the  effects  of  different  normal-
ization  methods,  we  did  not  optimize  the  parameters  for 
SW-Array  algorithm.  Second,  we  did  not  validate  all  the 
CNVs  identified  by  4  different  normalization  combina-
tions,  which  means  the  sensitivity  and  specificity  of 
these  different  combinations  were  not  evaluated.  It  is 
hard  to  make  a  solid  conclusion  on  whether  RMA  back-
ground  correction  plus  median  or  quantile  normalization 
is  the  best  optimized  normalization  method.  These  limi-
tations  will  be  able  to  overcome  through  molecular 
validation.  In  conclusion,  our  results  suggest  that  the  ef-
fect  of  different  normalization  methods  is  relatively  small 
compared  to  that  of  RMA  background  correction. 

Acknowledgement

This  work  is  supported  by  a  grant  from  the  Korea 
Health  21  R&D  Project,  Ministry  of  Health  &  Welfare, 
Republic  of  Korea  (01-PJ3-PG6-01GN09-003).

References

Iafrate,  A.J.,  Feuk,  L.,  Rivera,  M.N.,  Listewnik,  M.L., 
Donahoe,  P.K.,  Qi,  Y.,  Scherer,  S.W.,  and  Lee,  C.  (2004). 
Detection  of  large-scale  variation  in  the  human  genome. 
Nat. Genet.  36,  949-951.

Sebat,  J.,  Lakshmi,  B.,  Troge,  J.,  et al.  (2004).  Large-scale 
the  human  genome. 

in 

copy  number  polymorphism 
Science  305,  525-528.

Kim,  T.M.,  Yim,  S.H.,  and  Chung,  Y.J.  (2008).  Copy  number 
variations  in  the  human  genome:  potential  source  for  in-
dividual  diversity  and  disease  association  studies. 
Genomics & Informatics  6,  1-7.

McCarroll,  S.A.,  and  Altshuler,  D.M.  (2007).  Copy-number 
variation  and  association  studies  of  human  disease.  Nat. 
Genet.  39,  S37-S42.

Estivill,  X.,  and  Armengol,  L.  (2007).  Copy  number  variants 
and  common  disorders:  filling  the  gaps  and  exploring 
complexity  in  genome-wide  association  studies.  PLoS 
Genet.  10,  1787-1799.

de  Smith,  A.J.,  Tsalenko,  A.,  Sampas,  N.,  et al.  (2007). 
Array  CGH  analysis  of  copy  number  variation  identifies 
1284  new  genes  variant  in  healthy  white  males:  im-
plications  for  association  studies  of  complex  diseases. 
Hum. Mol. Genet.  16,  2783-2794.

Perry,  G.H.,  Ben-Dor,  A.,  Tsalenko,  A.,  et al.  (2008).  The 
fine-scale  and  complex  architecture  of  human  copy-num-
ber  variation.  Am. J. Hum. Genet.  82,  685-695.

Price,  T.S.,  Regan,  R.,  Mott,  R., et al.,  (2005)  SW-ARRAY:  a 
dynamic  programming  solution  for  the  identification  of 
copy-number  changes  in  genomic  DNA  using  array  com-
parative  genome  hybridization  data.  Nucleic Acids Res. 
33,  3455-3464.

