APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(1)  46-48,  March  2009

A  Simple  Java  Sequence  Alignment  Editing  Tool  for 
Resolving  Complex  Repeat  Regions

Seong-Il  Ham3,4,  Kyung-Eun  Lee2,4  and  Hyun- 
Seok  Park1,2*

1Institute  of  Bioinformatics,  Macrogen  Inc.,  Seoul  153- 
023,  Korea,  2Department  of  Computer  Science,  Ewha 
Womans  University,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea,  3Department 
of  Architectural  Engineering,  Yonsei  University,  Seoul 
120-749,  Korea,  4Department  of  Biochemistry  and  Mo-
lecular  Biology,  College  of  Medicine,  Seoul  National 
University,  Seoul  110-799,  Korea

Abstract

Finishing  is  the  most  time-consuming  step  in  sequenc-
ing,  and  many  genome  projects  are  left  unfinished  due 
to  complex  repeat  regions.  Here,  we  have  developed 
BACContigEditor,  a  prototype  shotgun  sequence  finish-
ing  tool.  It  is  essentially  an  editor  that  visualizes  assem-
blies  of  shotgun  sequence  fragment  reads  as  gapped 
multiple  alignments.  The  program  offers  some  flexibility 
that  is  needed  to  rapidly  resolve  complex  regions  within 
a  working  session.  The  sole  purpose  of  the  release  is  to 
promote  collaborative  creation  of  extensible  software  for 
fragment  assembly  editors,  foster  collaborative  develop-
ment,  and  reduce  barriers  to  initial  tool  development 
effort.  We  describe  our  software  architecture  and  identi-
fy  current  challenges.  The  program  is  available  under  an 
Open  Source  license. 

Availability:  BACContigEditor  is  a  public  domain  soft-
ware.  The  software  is  a  pre-alpha  release  and  provides 
only  basic  fragment  assembly  editing  features.  You  may 
download  this  program  from  the  source  (http://www. 
sourceforge.net/BACContigEditor/) 
for  use  on  your 
computer.  A  documented  API  makes  adding  new  algo-
rithms,  visualization  modes,  and  sequence  features 
easy.

Keywords: 
whole  genome  fragment  assembly

fragment  assembly,  genome  sequencing, 

Introduction

High-throughput  methods  for  genome  sequencing  have 
yielded  piles  of  genomic  sequences.  However,  genome 
assembly  is  a  traditionally  open  problem,  as  compli-
cated  parts  of  sequenced  genomes  tend  to  be  left  un-
finished  to  a  large  extent.  It  means  that  current  shotgun 
sequencing  assembly  programs 
(Phrap:  http://www. 
phrap.org/,  AMOS:  http://www.tigr.org/software/AMOS/, 
Celera  Assembler:  http://sourceforge.net/projects/wgs- 
assembler,  and  Arachne:  http://www.broad.mit.edu/wga/ 
arachnewiki/)  are  not  yet  designed  to  handle  long 
stretches  of  repeated  DNA  in  the  target  sequence.  One 
of  the  difficulties  in  repeat  classification  is  that  many  re-
peats  represent  mosaics  of  subrepeats  (Bailey  et al., 
2002).
    Repeats  cause  large  artificial  rearrangements  of  con-
tigs  due  to  misassembled  repeat  regions  (Fig.  1).  The 
presence  of  repeated  regions  in  the  target  sequence  is 
thus  the  key  problem  in  shotgun  sequencing  (She et al., 
2004;  Eichler  et al.,  2004).  A  successful  strategy  for 
solving  the  problem  of  short  repeat  regions  has  been 
the  use  of  mate  pairs  (Myers et al.,  2000).  However,  this 
strategy  fails  when  nearly  identical  repeats  are  or-
ganized  in  tandem  stretches  that  are  longer  than  multi-
ple  shotgun  fragment  insert  lengths.  Still,  these  prob-
lems  of  the  common  assembly  methods  place  a  heavy 
burden  on  the  bioinformaticians  who  work  on  the  finish-
ing  stage  of  sequencing  projects  (Edwards et al.,  1990). 
    Besides  these  traditional  difficulties,  the  recent  techno-
logical  divergence  of  high-throughput  sequencing  plat-
forms,  including  454  Life  Sciences  (Roche)  (http:// 
www.454.com/),  Solexa  of  the  Illumina  Genome  Analysis 
System  (http://www.illumina.com),  and  Applied  Biosy-
stems  SOLiD  Sequencing  (http://ww.appliedbiosystems. 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  10  February  2009

Fig.  1.  An  example  of  artificial  rearrangement:  the  repeat 
copies  are  piled  on  top  of  each  other  and  merged  into 
alignments  of  high  coverage.

com),  causes  thorny  issues.  The  fragment  assembly  and 
editing  process  again  is  becoming  the  most  critical  and 
challenging  problem  in  the  area  of  genomic  research.
    Thus,  we  present  a  pre-alpha  release  of  BACContig-
Editor  0.1,  an  assembly  editing  and  visualization  tool 
that  is  specifically  designed  for  manual  analysis  and  fin-
ishing  of  repeated  regions.  The  software  has  been  used 
only  to  assemble  BAC  shotgun  sequences.
    At  this  stage,  the  purpose  of  the  release  of  BACC-
ontigEditor  is  to  enhance  the  current  version  of  our 
software.  In  this  way,  we  believe  that  we  can  collabo-
rate  with  other  researchers  to  develop  a  better  version 
of  our  software.  The  source  code  is  available  from  the 
authors  under  an  Open  Source  license.

A  Simple  Java  Sequence  Alignment  Editing  Tool    47

Overview  of  the  System

BACContigEditor  is  a  simple  sequence  alignment  editing 
tool,  developed  in  Java.  It  was  originally  developed  to 
finish  BAC  shotgun  sequencing  projects,  but  the  pro-
gram  could  be  easily  extended  to  whole  genome 
projects.  It  deals  with  visualization  of  problematic  as-
sembly  locations,  providing  detailed  information  and  al-
lowing  rapid  decision-making  to  make  necessary  correc-
tions.  The  user  can  move  sequences  using  drag-drop, 
realign,  cut-paste,  and  add-remove  features.  The  user 
interface  is  a  front  end  to  a  database,  and  changes  are 
propagated  to  the  database. 
    The  assemblies  can  be  produced  by  an  assembler 
that  produces  the  supported  .frg-file  format,  translated 
from  .ace-files  from  Phrap  (http://www.phrap.org),  and 
can  be  exported  to  the  same  format  after  repeat  analy-
sis  and  resolution.  In  addition  to  the  read  sequences, 

Fig.  2.  Contig  realigning  movements.

48    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(1)  46-48,  March  2009

Fig.  3.  Zooming  features.

different  features  and  mate  pairs  are  visualized  in  the 
editor  according  to  the  preferences  of  the  user.  Sequ-
ence  features  can  be  present  in  the  input  assembly  files 
or  be  added  during  the  finishing  process. 
    The  finishing  of  repeated  regions  is  made  less  compli-
cated  using  BACContigEditor  by  providing  a  couple  of 
key  features:  the  availability  of  a  birds-eye  view  of  all  of 
the  reads  in  a  contig  and  manual  editing  operations.  By 
zooming  out,  the  user  gets  an  overview  of  the  contig 
and  its  length  and  depth  and  can  get  a  clear  picture  of 
the  general  properties  of  the  region  at  once.  By  using 
drag-drop,  it  is  possible  to  sort  reads  into  different  re-
peat  groups.  Vertical  and  horizontal  movement  of  reads 
is  allowed,  and  realigning  also  can  be  performed  (Fig. 
2).

Software  Release  Stage

BACContigEditor  has  been  implemented  using  Java  and 

relies  on  Open  Source  software.  Recently,  state-of- 
the-art  sequence  alignment  editing  tools  (Arner  et al., 
2006)  have  been  developed,  and  compared  with  these 
tools,  our  tool  is  only  a  pre-alpha  release.  Generally,  it 
needs  to  be  improved  with  a  user  interface;  with  a  rigid 
close-up  view,  the  user  can  only  view  a  small  portion  of 
the  repeat  region,  and  much  scrolling  is  required  to  get 
a  clear  understanding  of  the  region  (Fig.  3). 
    However,  we  are  developing  utility  programs  to  han-
dle  various  formats,  based  on  multiple  sequencing 
platforms.  Although  these  utility  programs  are  not  in-
cluded  in  the  current  distribution,  they  will  be  extremely 
useful  for  finishing  large  sequencing  projects  in  the 
future.  Updates  to  these  features  will  be  available 
through  the  project  web  site  (http://www.sourceforge. 
net/BACContigEditor/)  at  frequent  intervals. 

References 

Arner,  E.,  et al.  (2006).  DNPTrapper:  an  assembly  editing 
tool  for  finishing  and  analysis  of  complex  repeat  regions. 
BMC Bioinformatics  20,  155.

Bailey,  J.,  et al.,  (2002).  Human-specific  duplication  and 
mosaic  transcripts:  The  recent  paralogous  structure  of 
chromosome  22.  Am. J. Hum. Genet.  70,  83-100.

Edwards,  A.,  and  Caskey,  C.T.  (1990).  Closure  strategies 
for  random  DNA  sequencing  methods.  A Companion to 
Methods in Enzymology  3,  41-47.

Eichler,  E.E.,  Clark,  R.A.,  and  She,  X.  (2004).  An  assess-
ment  of  the  sequence  gaps:  unfinished  business  in  a  fin-
ished  human  genome.  Nat Rev Genet.  5,  345-354.

Myers,  E.W.,  et al.  (2000).  A  wholegenome  assembly  of 

Drosophila.  Science  287,  2196-204.

She,  X.,  et al.  (2004).  Shotgun  sequence  assembly  and  re-
cent  segmental  duplications  within  the  human  genome. 
Nature  431,  927-930.

