A PPLIC A TIO N

N O TE

Genomics  &  Informatics   Vol. 5(4) 200-202, December 2007

The AB05 NIAB Tools Workbench for Building Automatic 
Biopathway Maps for Agricultural Organisms

1)

Mi Kyung Cho2, Kyung Oh Yoon1 and Hyun Seok 
Park1,2*

1Institute of Bioinformatics, Macrogen Inc., Seoul 153-023, 
Korea,  2Department of Computer Science, Ewha Womans 
University,  Seoul  120-75,  Korea
10)
Summary
For the past several years, we have built various tools for 
automatic construction of biopathways to help biological 
experts, especially in the field of agriculture. We integrated 
several  systems  for  constructing  web  applications  for 
analyzing biological pathway information for agricultural 
species, constructing optimized pathway maps. In addition 
to  building  web  applications  for  agricultural  pathway 
information, we developed several stand-alone software 
tools,  which  are  publicly  downloadable  under  proper 
license agreements. 

Availability: The website for the system is http://biopath. 
niab.go.kr/index.jsp. Technical manuals for the project 
are available.
Keywords: visualization, pathway map, interaction, 
bioinformatics

The AB05 Modules
We have been building a software system-the NIAB AB05 
Tools Workbench-for analyzing and visualizing biological 
pathways and networks for efficient exploitation. It is based 
on a comprehensive, extensible data model that can be 
used to model biological pathways and networks. The 
system aims to be a portal site for agricultural genome and 
pathway information sites, combining genome and pathway 
informatics modules on the web. The system has been 
uniformly written in Java for portability, composed of several 
web  application  modules  and  stand-alone  modules, 
including ABIS, MPV, PathFinder, BioPathCAD, BioNetView, 
Biopathway XML Conversion Parser, PDB3D, BioTextMiner, 
WeSAT, Interfacer, and WASPIV. These modules can be 

further  divided  into  web-based  tools  and  stand-alone 
modules.

The  ABIS,  MPV,  BioNetView,  and  BioTextMiner 
modules  are  web-based  service  modules.  To  explain 
some of the features of these modules, the ABIS (Fig. 1(a)) 
and MPV (Fig. 1(c)) modules are designed as three-tier 
applications:  a  tier  for  providing  interfaces  to  existing 
databases, a tier for analyzing biopathway data, and a tier 
for visualizing the result of the analysis. They are based on 
an SVG11)-based tool for visualizing metabolic pathways 
and regulatory pathways. The goal of BioNetView (Fig. 
1(b)) is to create a clear and useful protein-interaction 
visualization model that is fully automated to handle large 
datasets. The browser is a tool that hierarchically lists the 
pathways,  processes,  and  molecular  entities  in  the 
database. BioTextMiner in Fig. 1(d) is also a web-based 
application tool designed to handle textual information 
related to biological pathways through the internet. Because 
important background knowledge in bioinformatics is often 
buried in textual documents, the role of BioTextMiner is to 
search the literature and automatically extract information 
from online abstracts and papers. 

Other  tools  are  stand-alone  modules  at  this  time, 
although converting stand-alone applications into web- 
based services is not difficult. To explain several modules 
among them, PDB3D in Fig. 1(e) is a simple PDB (Protein 
Data Bank) visualization tool for biomolecular structures, 
sequences, and sequence alignments. The view of the 
structure  can  be  changed  in  several  ways.  Residues 
selected through the sequence view will be highlighted by 
a brighter-than-usual color. The BioCAD module in Fig. 1(f) 
is  also  a  stand-alone  pathway  editor  for  drawing  and 
annotating biological pathways. It integrates the different 
possibilities of charting elements with different attributes, 
drawing  connections  between  elements  with  distinct 
characteristics. The result of the editing process is an XML 
(eXtended Markup Language) file for the appropriate links.
Due to limited space, we have briefly introduced only 
several exemplary modules of the NIAB AB05 Workbench. 
We expect that by combining these modules in the future, 
we will create a software environment that enables users 
to conduct a large number of bioinformatics analyses, 
combined with smooth data management and excellent 

*Corresponding author: E-mail hspark@macrogen.com 
Tel +82-2-3277-2306, Fax +82-2-3277-2305
Accepted 22 October 2007

1) Scalable Vector Graphic (SVG) is an XML specification and 
file  format  for  describing  two-dimensional  vector  graphic, 
both static and animated.

The AB05 NIAB Tools Workbench 201

graphical viewing and output options. 

Software Release Stage
Implementation  of  each  module  has  progressed  far 
beyond what was initially planned and now incorporates 
concepts required for representing many other biological 
pathways. However, some AB05 NIAB Tools still await full 
testing  of  all  their  functionalities  and  is  not  feature 
complete. The current release is the first version released 
outside the organization that developed the software, for 

the  purpose  of  evaluation  or  real-world  testing.  Our 
software  generally  includes  all  features  but  may  also 
include known issues and bugs of a less serious variety. 
For example, BioCAD in Fig. 1(f) is only an alpha release. 
Identification of appropriate knowledge discovery problems, 
integration design of each module, and development of 
evaluation methods are also ongoing. We expect to have 
a  bioinformatics  solution  that  continuously  evolves 
through frequent program updates with the latest scientific 
developments. 

(a) The ABIS System

(b) Multi Pathway Viewer

(c) BioNetView

(d) BioTextMiner

Fig. 1. AB05 Tools

(e) PDB3D

(f) BioCAD

202 Genomics & Informatics   Vol. 5(4) 200-202, December 2007

Acknowledgments

Some of the AB05 NIAB Tools have been used for several 
applications. The ABIS System had been used for analyzing 
Xanthomonas oryzae (Lee et al., 2005), and MPV module 
had been used for a microarray LIMS system for multi-
platform microarrays (Cho et al., 2007).

This work was supported by a grant from the National 
Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology and the Ministry of 
Information and Communication of Korea. We would like 
to  thank  the  46  participants  in  this  project,  including 
Hyung-Tae Kim, Ki-Bong Kim, Min-Kyung Kim, Dong- 
Hoon Oh, Young-Joo Seol, Hyung-Seok Ko, and many 

others. 

References

Cho,  M.K.,  Kang,  J.H.,  and  Park,  H.S.  (2007).  A  DNA 
Microarray LIMS System for Integral Genomic Analysis of 
Multi-Platform Microarrays. G&I. 5(2), 83-87.

Lee,  B.M.,  et  al.  (2005).  The  genome  sequence  of 
Xanthomonas oryzae pathovar oryzae KACC10331, the 
bacterial blight pathogen of rice. NAR. 33(2), 577-86.

