Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  3(3} 94-97, September 2005 

Patome: Database of Patented Bio-sequences 

SeonKyu Kim1  and ByungWook Lee1,2* 

1National  Genome  Information  Center,  Korea  Research 
Institute of Bioscience and  Biotechnology,  Daejeon 305-333, 
Korea 
2Department  of  BioSystems,  Korea  Advanced  Institute  of 
Science  and  Technology,  Daejeon  305-701,  Korea 

information 

the  annotation 

Abstract 
We  have  built a database server called  Patome which 
contains 
for  patented 
bio-sequences  from  the  Korean  Intellectual  Property 
Office (KIPO).  The aims of the  Patome are to annotate 
Korean patent bio-sequences and to provide information 
on  patent  relationship  of  public  database  entries.  The 
patent  sequences  were  annotated  with  Reference 
Sequence (RefSeq) or NCBI's nrdatabase. The raw patent 
data and the annotated data were stored in the database. 
Annotation information can be used to determine whether 
a particular RefSeq ID or NCBI's nriD is related to Korean 
patent. Patome infrastructure consists of three components(cid:173)
the database itself, a sequence data loader, and an online 
database query interface. The database can be queried 
using submission number, organism, title, applicant name, 
or  accession  number.  Patome  can  be  accessed  at 
http://www.patome.net. The information will be updated 
every two months. 

~: Patome, Korean patent bio-sequences, annotation, 
web service. 

Introduction 
Recent  advances  in  high-throughput  sequencing  tech(cid:173)
nologies have enabled us to determine many genomic se(cid:173)
quences  fast  and  cheaply.  The  number  of  bases  in 
GenBank has  doubled approximately every 14 months 
(Benson eta/., 2004). These sequence data can be used 
in a variety of the industrial fields such as medicine, agri-

*Corresponding author:  E-mail  bulee@kribb.re.kr, 
Tel +82-42-879-8535, Fax +82-879-8519 
Accepted  14 July 2005 

culture, nutrition, and environment (Collins eta/., 2003). 
For bio-sequences such as DNA,  RNA,  and protein, ac(cid:173)
quiring their intellectual property rights means to hold pos(cid:173)
session of comprehensive rights on their applications. One 
of the main issues in the post genomic era is how fast se(cid:173)
quences and functions of genes are determined, and who 
preempts their patent rights. 

Currently, three organizations offer patented bio-sequence 
data to  the  public:  the  National  Center  for  Biotechnology 
Information  (NCBI),  the  European  Bioinformatics  Institute 
(EBI),  and  the  DNA  Database  of  Japan  (DDBJ).  These 
organizations  provide  publicly  patented  bio-sequence 
data  downloading,  simple  keyword  searching,  and 
alignment searching (Miyazaki  eta/., 2004;  Kanz  eta/., 
2005; Benson eta/., 2004). Thompson Derwent and the 
Chemical  Abstract Service  maintain  commercial  patent 
databases containing more comprehensive information. 
The commercial resources are expensive to use and are 
usually accessed by private commercial entities (Rouse et 
a!.,  2005). 

According to the KIPO report of May 2005, the office 
had  received  6,237  bio-sequence  related  applications 
containing  117,873  nucleotide  sequences  and  57,926 
protein sequences. On average, 100 bio-sequences are filed 
each  month.  We  receive  Korean  patented  bio-sequence 
data from KIPO once a month. The main purpose of filing 
patent application is acquiring legal rights which permit an 
inventor to prevent others from making, using or selling the 
invention,  not  finding 
functions  or 
meanings. So far, no attempt has been made to annotate 
patented bio-sequences from a biological perspective. 

their  biological 

In  this  report,  we  describe  Patome,  a  new  publicly 
available database for annotated Korean patent sequences, 
as well  as raw patent data from  KIPO.  To annotate the 
patented bio-sequences, BLAST algorithm (Altschul eta/., 
1997) was used to compare Korean patented bio-sequences 
against  two  public  databases:  RefSeq  or  NCBI's  nr.  A 
database entry with the  highest scoring  BLAST hit was 
assigned to each patented bio-sequence. We also provide 
an  online  BLAST query  interface to  compare  an  input 
sequence against Korean patented bio-sequences. These 
data and services are available at http://IIIIINW.patorne.net/ and 
the information will be updated every two months. 

Patent raw data 

FASTA format 

EMBL format 

Fig.  1. The processing flow of patented data in the Patome 

Methods 
System Architecture 
Patome infrastructure consists of three components-the 
database  itself,  a data  loader,  and  an  online  database 
query interface (Fig. 1 ).  It is operated on a Linux system. 

Patome:  Database of Patented Bio-sequences  95 

The  consolidated  dataset  is  stored  and  served  from  a 
MySQL  relational  database  management  system  (http:// 
VIMW.mysql.coml).  The data loader and online database 
query  programs  are  implemented  using JAVA (http://IJIMW. 
cpan.orgl)  standard  library  and  Java  server  pages  (JSP) 
(http://java.sun.com/products/jspl), respectively. Web serv(cid:173)
ice is served on TOMCAT (http://jakarta.apache.org/tom(cid:173)
catl) framework ver. 5.1. 

Data Acquisition 
In  accordance  with  the  agreement  between  KIPO  and 
KRIBB  on  July  8,  2004,  KIPO  provides  NGIC  with 
patented bio-sequence data in Korea once a month. The 
format of the data offered by KIPO was RDBMS dumps. 
Therefore,  the  data were converted to  a FASTA format 
and an  EMBL format for further processing. 

Annotation of Patented Sequences 
Patented  bio-sequences can  be divided  into two  types: 
nucleic acid and amino acid. To annotate the nucleic acid 
sequences,  MegaBLAST (Zhang  et al., 2000) was used 
to compare the nucleic acid sequences against RefSeq 
mRNA.  For  those  not  covered  by  RefSeq  mRNA,  we 
annotated with NCBI's nrby using BLASTX. The BLAST 
results were filtered by an E-value cutoff score of 1.0E-5. 
Out of 117,873 patented nucleic acid sequences, 21 ,538 

Fig. 2.  Snapshots of Patome website: the left window is a homepage and the right window is an advanced search interface. 

96  Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  3(3) 94-97, September 2005 

(18%) were annotated with RefSeq mANA or NCBI's nr. 
Among  un-annotated  nucleic  acid  sequences,  59,318 
(62%) were primer sequences that have explicit primer 
descriptions in  the  patent title or are  less than  30bp  in 
length. 

To annotate the amino acid sequences, BLASTP was 
used  to  compare  the  amino  acid  sequences  against 
RefSeq protein or NCBI's nr. An E-value cutoff was set to 
1.0E-5. 27,270 (47%) out of 57,926 patented amino acid 
sequences  were  annotated  with  the  public  databases. 
18,393 (60%) of the un-annotated amino acid sequences 
were very short amino acid sequences  (<15  residues). 
The annotated data can be downloaded from the Patome 
website. 

Construction of the Database 

We designed and constructed the Patome database 
containing  the  raw  patent  data  and  the  annotated 
bio-sequence data.  In  the  Patome database,  there are 
ten  database  tables  which  are  classified  into  two 
sections:  application  related  part  and  bio-sequence 
related  part.  The  tables  in  the  application  related  part 
contain  basic  patent  information  such  as  sequence 
information, applicants, abstracts, and priority rights. The 
tables in the bio-sequence related part contain sequence 
raw data such as references, feature, and sequences, as 
well  as  annotation  data.  We  developed  a  data  loader 
program that has the following functions: confirming data 
format,  loading data, and exporting EMBUFASTA files. 

the  advanced  search 

Searching 
The Patome search web interfaces consist of three types: 
keyword, accession number, and BLAST similarity (Fig. 
2).  In the keyword search, there are two search modes: 
quick and  advanced.  If a  user wants  to  query multiple 
keywords  simultaneously, 
is 
appropriate.  In  the  advanced  mode,  the  user can  also 
limit the results by specifying a date range or by applying 
the Boolean operations AND,  OR,  and  NOT.  The quick 
search  mode  was designed  for those  not familiar  with 
advanced syntax.  In the quick mode,  if a search field  is 
not  fixed,  the target  of  search  is  all  the  fields.  In  both 
modes,  the  user  can  query  keywords  against  the 
following  fields:  applicant  name,  application  number, 
species, index word, priority rights number, English title, 
and summary. 

In  the  accession  number  search,  we  provide  the 
searching  service  on  the  annotated  bio-sequences. 
When  the  user  queries  a  accession  number  or  a  Gl 
number (NCBI  Seq.  UID), the system displays patented 

bio-sequences  and  information  related  to  an  input 
number. From the search results, the user can obtain the 
information  on  whether  their  sequence  is  related  to 
Korean patents. 

To construct  BLAST searching system,  we  installed 
WWW BLAST server (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/ 
download.html) and formatted  patent bio-sequences by 
NCBI's  formatdb  program.  Users  can  compare  their 
sequences against Korean patent bio-sequences. 

Korean patent bio-sequences and related data have 
been  incorporated  into  Sequence  Retrieval  System 
(SRS)  (http://srs.ngic.re.kr/srsl)  at  NGIC.  SRS  is  a 
scalable  data  integration  platform  that  is  used  at  over 
300 commercial and academic sites. The user can utilize 
the  SRS  system  to  find  the  answers  to  complicated 
questions  related  to  patented  bio-sequences,  for 
example,  finding the protein motifs of a selected patent 
protein sequence 

Results and Discussion 
Through the  Patome website, we offer the following 
services: the latest patented bio-sequences downloading, 
keyword search,  similarity search,  and tab delimited 
annotation data downloading. However, downloading of 
all the patented bio-sequences data is not allowable due 
to the agreement between Kl PO and KRIBB. To download 
all the data,  users must obtain permission from KIPO. 

Acknowledgements 

We  thank  Dr.  YoungGyun  Cho  at  KIPO  for  helpful 
discussion.  This  work  was  supported  by  the  Korean 
Ministry of Science and Technology under grant number 
M1-0437-01-0002. This work was also supported by the 
KRIBB Research Initiative Program. We thank Maryana 
Bhak and Jong Bhak for editing the manuscript. 

References 
Altschul,  S.F.,  Madden,  T.L.,  Schaffer,  A.A.,  Zhang,  J., 
Zhang, Z.,  Miller, W.,  and Lipman,  O.J.  (1997). Gapped 
BLAST  and  PSI-BLAST:  a  new  generation  of  protein 
database  search  programs.  Nucleic  Acids  Res.  25, 
3389-3402. 

Benson, O.A., Karche-Mizrachi, 1.,  Limpman, O.J., Ostell, J., 
and  Wheeler  O.L.  (2004).  GenBank:  Update.  Nucleic 
Acids Res.  32,  023-026. 

Collins,  F.S.,  Green,  E.O.,  Guttmacher,  A.E.,  and  Guyer 
M.S.  (2003).  A  vision  for  the  future  of  genomics 

Patome: Database of Patented Bio-sequences  97 

research.  Nature 422,  835-847 

Kanz, C., Aldebert, P., Althorpe, N.,  Baker, W.,  Baldwin, A., 
Bates,  K.,  Browne,  P.,  van  den  Broek,  A.,  Castro,  M., 
Cochrane,  G.,  et  a/.  (2005).  The  EMBL  Nucleotide 
Sequence Database.  Nucleic Acids Res. 33, D29-D33 
Miyazaki,  S.,  Sugawara,  H.,  lkeo,  K.,  Gojobori,  T.,  and 
Tateno,  Y.  (2004).  DDBJ  in  the  stream  of  various 

biological data. Nucleic Acids Res.  32,  D31-D34. 

Rouse,  J.D.,  Castagnetto,  J.,  and  Niedner,  R.H.  (2005). 
PatGen-a  consolidated  resource  for  searching  genetic 
patent sequences.  Bioinformatics 21,  1707-1708. 

Zhang, Z., Schwartz, S., Wagner, L., and Miller, W.(2000). A 
greedy  algorithm  for  aligning  DNA  sequences.  J. 
Comput.  Bioi. 7,  203~214. 

