APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(4)  208-211,  December  2009

IdMapper:  A  Java  Application  for  ID  Mapping  across  Multiple 
Cross-referencing  Providers

Hookeun  Lee,  Hyeonjin  Kim  and  Ungsik  Yu*

Lee  Gil  Ya  Cancer  and  Diabetes  Institute,  Gachon  Uni-
versity  of  Medicine  and  Science,  Incheon  406-840, 
Korea

Abstract

We  developed  an  identifier  mapping  application  for  bio-
informatics  research  in  Java  programming  language.  It  is 
easy  to  use  and  provides  many  usability  functionalities 
that  are  expected  as  essentials  for  a  professional  appli-
cation.  It  supports  three  widely  used  mapping  services 
and  can  convert  many  ids  from  one  source  database  in-
to  many  target  databases  at  once.  Id  mapping  across 
service  providers  is  possible  by  remapping  the  resultant 
ids.  Because  it  adheres  to  the  NetBeans  platform  archi-
tecture,  it  can  be  incorporated  into  other  NetBeans  plat-
form  applications  as  an  id  mapping  provider  without 
adaption  or  modification.

Availability:  You  can  access  the  application  at  http://ne-
on.  gachon.ac.kr/idmapper.html.

Keywords:  ID  mapping,  java,  netbeans,  rich  client,  web 
services

Introduction

“-omics”  style  experiments,  such  as  sequencing,  micro-
array,  and  proteomics,  generate  enormous  amounts  of 
data  (Kim  et al.,  2006,  Kim  et al.,  2008).  To  integrate 
and  analyze  the  data  in  various  respects,  multiple  tools 
are  used.  Each  tool  supports  its  own  set  of  identifiers 
for  genes  or  gene  products.  Even  though  there  are 
widely  used  identifiers,  such  as  Ensembl  (Flicek  et al., 
2008),  NCBI  RefSeq  (Pruitt  et al.,  2007),  UniProt  (The 
Uniprot  Consortium,  2008)  and  HGNC  (Povey  et al., 
2001),  there  is  no  universal  identifier.  When  multiple 
tools  and  services  are  used,  identifier  conversion  prob-
lems  across  multiple  databases  arise  frequently.  A  small 
research  group  can  not  afford  its  own  mapping  service 
and  relies  on  external  services.  There  exist  efforts  to 
reconcile  identifiers  across  multiple  source  databases, 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  ungsik@gachon.ac.kr
Tel  +82-32-899-6058,  Fax  +82-32-899-6039
Accepted  12  November  2009

such  as  the  David  gene  ID  conversion  tool  (Huang  et 
al.,  2008),  MatchMiner  (Bussey et al.,  2003),  IDconverter 
(Alibes et al.,  2007),  Onto-  translate  (Khatri et al.,  2006), 
PICR  (Cote et al.,  2007),  Synergizer  (Brriz et al.,  2008), 
and  Biomart  (Smedley  et al.,  2009).
    Services  that  are  provided  in  the  form  of  a  web  page 
can  not  be  incorporated  into  other  applications  easily. 
Only  a  few  services  provide  API  access  for  batch  map-
ping  or  incorporation  into  other  applications.
    The  Protein  Identifier  Cross-Reference  (PICR)  service 
is  a  web  application  that  provides  interactive  and  pro-
grammatic  (SOAP  and  REST)  access  to  a  mapping  algo-
rithm  that  uses  the  UniProt  Archive  (UniParc)  as  a  data 
warehouse  to  offer  protein  cross-references.  The  Syner-
gizer  is  a  service  for  translating  between  sets  of  bio-
logical  identifiers.  It  can,  for  example,  translate  Ensembl 
Gene  IDs  to  Entrez  Gene  IDs,  or  IPI  IDs  to  HGNC  gene 
symbols,  and  much  more.  The  Synergizer  works  via  a 
web  interface  (for  users  who  are  not  programmers)  or 
through  a  web  service 
(for  programmatic  access). 
BioMart  is  a  query-oriented  data  management  system, 
developed  jointly  by  the  Ontario  Institute  for  Cancer 
Research  (OICR)  and  the  European  Bioinformatics  Insti-
tute  (EBI).  It  can  be  accessed  via  web  services  and  can 
be  adapted  for  identifier  mapping.
    BridgeDb,  though  not  released  publically  yet,  is  an-
other  attempt  at  an  id  mapping  framework  for  bio-
informatics  applications.  BridgeDb  lets  one  add  the  fol-
lowing  capabilities  quickly  and  easily:  translate  identi-
fiers  from  one  system  to  another,  search  references  by 
id  or  symbol,  and  link  out  to  online  information  for  an 
identifier.  Applications,  such  as  the  PathVisio  pathway 
analysis  tool,  WikiPathways,  CyThesaurus  Cytoscape 
plug-in,  and  the  NetworkMerge  Cytoscape  plug-in,  are 
utilizing  functionalities  provided  by  BridgeDB.

Methods

Instead  of  developing  the  system  from  scratch,  we  as-
sembled  the  application  by  re-using  available  services, 
frameworks,  and  libraries  as  much  as  possible.
    For  ID  mapping  itself,  we  used  ID  mapping  services 
provided  by  other  research  groups  that  allowes  pro-
grammatic  access.  We  picked  the  service  provided  by 
PICR,  Synergizer,  and  Biomart,  as  they  are  recently  de-
veloped  and/or  well  maintained.  Currently,  the  BridgeDb 
library  implements  an  ID  mapping  service  for  them,  and 
we  used  BridgeDb’s  API  for  the  access  of  id  mapping 

IdMapper:  An  ID  Mapping  Java  Application    209

Fig.  1.  NetBeans  Platform 
Rich  Client  Application  Archi-
tecture.  The  platform  provi-
des  various  kinds  of  libraries 
for  GUI  application  develop-
ment.

services.  Three  mapping  services  were  incorporated  into 
one  application,  and  relevant  metadata  and  mapping  re-
sults  are  fetched  from  each  service  provider  on  the  fly; 
no  data  are  stored  in  the  application.

Implementation

We  developed  the  application  as  a  NetBeans  Platform- 
based  standalone  Java  Web  Start  rich  client  application.
    We  selected  the  Java  environment  because  the  devel-
oped  application  can  be  utilized  under  most  operating 
systems,  such  as  Windows,  Linux,  and  Mac  OS,  pro-
vided  that  the  Java  Runtime  Environment  is  installed. 
Java  Web  Start  technology  enables  the  standalone  Java 
software  applications  to  be  deployed  with  a  single  click 
over  the  network.  Java  Web  Start  ensures  that  the  most 
current  version  of  the  application,  as  well  as  the  correct 
version  of  the  Java  Runtime  Environment  (JRE),  will  be 
deployed. 
    Most  desktop  applications  have  similar  features,  such 
as  menus,  toolbars,  status  bars,  progress  visualization, 
data  displays,  customization  settings,  the  saving  and 
loading  of  user-specific  data  and  configurations,  splash 
screens,  About  boxes,  internationalization,  help  systems, 
and  so  on.  For  these  and  other  typical  client  application 
features,  a  rich  client  platform,  which  is  an  application 
lifecycle  environment  and  a  basis  for  desktop  applica-
tions,  provides  a  framework  with  which  the  features  can 
quickly  and  simply  be  put  together.  A  rich  client  plat-
form  also  frees  the  developer  from  being  concerned 
with  tasks  that  have  little  to  do  with  the  application’s 
business  logic.  Currently,  the  NetBeans  Platform  and 
Eclipse  rich  client  platform  are  in  wide  use  for  Java- 
based  application  development.  Recently,  some  bio-

informatics-related  applications,  such  as  BioClipse, 
Quantitative  Biology  Tool,  SpectraSuite,  InstantJChem, 
and  ChipInspector,  have  been  developed  using  the  rich 
client  platform.  It  is  expected  that  utilization  of  the  rich 
client  platform  for  applications  development  will  become 
popular.
    We  chose  the  NetBeans  platform  because  there  al-
ready  exist  many  Swing-based  bioinformatics  applica-
tions.  We  plan  to  develop  a  general  purpose  bioinfor-
matics  application  framework,  covering  various  areas  by 
adapting  and  integrating  these  existing  applications  as 
needed.
    We  designed  the  application  functionality  and  layout, 
developed  the  core  mapping  function,  and  glued  those 
to  the  NetBeans  platform.  The  NetBeans  platform  pro-
vides  quite  a  lot  of  libraries  for  applications  develop-
ment  (Fig.  1),  and  we  tried  to  utilize  the  functionalities 
as  much  as  possible  and  minimize  custom  develop-
ments.  After  the  initial  steep  learning  curve,  we  were 
able  to  develop  a  high-quality,  robust,  and  extensible 
application  without  much  housekeeping  code  develop-
ment  effort.
    By  using  the  Swingx  JXTable,  the  resulting  mapping 
table  can  be  customized  further  by  column  visibility 
control,  row  sorting,  and  column  ordering.  The  copy/ 
paste/save  supports  are  provided  for  the  resulting  map-
ping  table  with  user-defined  column  and  row  selection 
(Fig.  2).

Results  and  Discussion

The  developed  application  is  simple  and  easy  yet  pow-
erful  for  ID  conversion.  It  supports  three  widely  used 
mapping  services  and  can  convert  many  ids  from  one 

210    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(4)  208-211,  December  2009

Fig.  2.  IdMapper  sample  mapping  result.  Start  IdMapping  by  selecting  “New  ID  mapping”  action  from  the  “ID  mapping”
menu  bar.  Specify  the  DataSource,  source  Id  type,  and  target  id  types  in  the  “DataSource  window.”  Upload  or  paste  the 
ids  for  conversion  into  the  “Conversion  Window”  and  select  “Perform  mapping”  from  the  “ID  mapping”  menu  bar.  It  is  pos-
sible  to  select  and  copy  parts  of  the  mapping  table.

source  database  into  many  target  databases  at  once. 
By  copying  the  resulting  mapped  ids  and  mapping 
again  against  other  cross-referencing  providers,  it  is 
possible  to  map  the  ids  further.
    We  plan  to  extend  the  source  database  to  the  other 
id  mapping  services  that  provide  programmatic  access, 
such  as  CRONOS  (Waegele  et al.,  2009).  In  that  re-
spect,  we  will  use  JAX-WS  directly  instead  of  the 
BridgeDb  library,  which  currently  supports  only  a  limited 
number  of  mapping  services.
    The  application  is  now  a  standalone  Web  Start  appli-
cation,  but  it  can  be  converted  into  a  NetBeans  platform 
plug-in  with  simple  re-packaging.  The  converted  plug-in 
can  be  used  as  an  ID  mapping  provider  for  other  bio-
informatics  applications.
    There  are  many  bioinformatics  Java  GUI  applications, 
but  combining  each  application  with  another  is  next  to 

impossible  for  most  cases,  because  each  application 
implements  its  own  way  of  “plumbing.”  Programs  that 
are  developed  as  plug-ins  for  a  rich  client  platform  can 
be  re-used  and  work  together  seamlessly  with  other  in-
dependently  developed  plug-ins.  This  application  can  be 
used  as  an  ID  mapping  provider  plug-in  for  other  bio-
informatics  applications.  Applications  development  in 
this  direction  will  facilitate  the  merging  and  integration  of 
individual  modules  into  a  large  bioinformatics  applica-
tions  framework  that  includes  many  areas.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  a  grant  (2007-03983)  from 
the  Korea  Science  and  Engineering  Foundation  funded 
by  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology  of 
Korea  government.

References
Alibes,  A.,  Yankilevich,  P.,  Cañada,  A.,  and  Díaz-Uriarte,  R. 

(2007).  IDconverter  and  ICDlight:  Convertsion  and  anno-
tation  of  gene  and  protein  IDs. BMC Bioinformatics  8,  9.

BioClipse.  http://www.bioclipse.net.
BridgeDb.  http://www.bridgedb.org.
Berriz,  G.F.,  and  Roth,  F.P.  (2008).  The  Synergizer  service 
for  translating  gene,  protein  and  other  biological  identi-
fiers.  Bioinformatics  24,  2272-2273.

Bussey,  K.J.,  Kane,  D.,  Sunshine,  M.,  Narasimhan,  S., 
Nishizuka,  S.,  Reinhold,  W.C.,  Zeeberg,  B.,  Ajay,  W.,  and 
Weinstein,  J.N.  (2003).  MatchMiner:  a  tool  for  batch  navi-
gation  among  gene  and  gene  product 
identifiers. 
Genome Biology  4,  R27.

ChipInspector.  http://www.genomatix.de/products/ChipInspector/ 

index.html.

Cote,  R.G.,  Jones,  P.,  Martens,  L.,  Kerrien,  S.,  Reisinger, 
F.,  Lin,  Q.,  Leinonen,  R.,  Apweiler,  R.,  and  Jermjakob,  H. 
(2007).  The  Protein  Identifier  Cross-Referencing  (PICR) 
service:  reconciling  protein 
identifiers  across  multiple 
source  databases.  BMC Bioinformatics  8,  401.

Flicek,  P.,  Aken,  B.L.,  Beal,  K.,  Ballester,  B.,  Caccamo,  M., 
Chen,  Y.,  Clarke,  L.,  Coates,  G.,  Cunningham,  F.,  Cutts, 
T.,  Down,  T.,  Dyer,  S.C.,  Eyre,  T.,  Fitzgerald,  S., 

Fernandez-Banet,  J.,  Gräf,  S.,  Haider,  S.,  Hammond,  M., 
Jenkinson,  A.,  Kähäri,  A.,  Keefe,  D.,  Kokocinski,  F., 

Holland,  R.,  Howe,  K.L.,  Howe,  K.,  Johnson,  N., 

Kulesha,  E.,  Lawson,  D.,  Longden,  I.,  Megy,  K.,  Meidl, 
P.,  Overduin,  B.,  Parker,  A.,  Pritchard,  B.,  Prlic,  A.,  Rice, 
S.,  Rios,  D.,  Schuster,  M.,  Sealy,  I.,  Slater,  G.,  Smedley, 
D.,  Spudich,  G.,  Trevanion,  S.,  Vilella,  A.J.,  Vogel,  J., 
White,  S.,  Wood,  M.,  Birney,  E.,  Cox,  T.,  Curwen,  V., 
Durbin,  R.,  Fernandez-Suarez,  X.M.,  Herrero,  J.,  Hubbard, 
T.J.P.,  Kasprzyk,  A.,  Proctor,  G.,  Smith,  J.,  Ureta-Vidal, 
A.,  and  Searle,  S.  (2008).  Ensembl  2008.  Nucl. Acids 
Res.  36,  D707-714.

Huang,  D.W.,  Sherman,  B.T.,  Stephens,  R.,  Baseler,  M.W., 

IdMapper:  An  ID  Mapping  Java  Application    211

Lane,  H.C.,  and  Lempicki,  R.A.  (2008).  DAVID  gene  ID 
conversion  tool.  Bioinformation  2,  428-430.

InstantJChem.  http://www.chemaxon.com/instantjchem/.
JAX-WS.  https://jax-ws.dev.java.net/.
Khatri,  P.,  Desai,  V.,  Tarca,  A.L.,  Sellamuthu,  S.,  Wildman, 
(2006).  New 
and 

D.E.,  Romero,  R.,  and  Draghici,  S. 
Onto-Tools: 
nsSNPCounter 
Onto-Translate.  Nucl. Acids Res.  34,  W626-W631.

Promoter-Express, 

Kim,  C.,  Choi,  J.,  and  Yoon,  S.  (2008).  Microarray  data 
analysis  of  perturbed  pathways  in  breast  cancer  tissues. 
Genomics & Informatics  6,  210-222.

Kim,  K.,  Chung,  H.,  Jeung,  H.,  Shin,  J.,  Kim,  T.,  and  Rha, 
S.  (2006).  Significant  gene  selection  using  integrated  mi-
croarray  data  set  with  batch  effect.  Genomics  & 
Informatics 4,  103-109.

NetBeans  Platform.  http://platform.netbeans.org.
Povey,  S.,  Lovering,  R.,  Bruford,  E.,  Wright,  M.,  Lush,M., 
and  Wain,  H.  (2001).  The  HUGO  Gene  Nomenclature 
Committee  (HGNC).  Hum. Genet.  109,  678-680.

Pruitt,  K.D.,  Tatusova,  T.,  and  Maglott,  D.R.  (2007).  NCBI 
reference  sequences  (RefSeq):  a  curated  non-redundant 
sequence  database  of  genomes,  transcripts  and  proteins. 
Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D61-65.

Quantitative  Biology  Tool. http://www.semanticbits.com/what_ 

we_do/software_solutions/qbt.php.

Smedley,  D.,  Haider,  S.,  Ballester,  B.,  Holland,  R.,  London, 
D.,  Thorisson,  G.,  and  Kasprzyk,  A.  (2009).  BioMart-bio-
logical  queries  made  easy.  BMC Genomics  10,  22.

SpectraSuite.  http://www.oceanoptics.com/Products/spectrasuite. 

asp.

Sun  Java.  http://java.sun.com.
SwingLabs.  http://swinglabs.org.
The  Uniprot  Consortium  (2008).  The  universal  protein  re-

source  (UniProt).  Nucl. Acids Res.  36,  D190-195.

Waegele  B.,  Dunger-Kaltenbach  I.,  Fobo  G.,  Montrone  C., 
Mewes,  H.W.,  and  Ruepp,  A.  (2009).  CRONOS:  the 
crossreference  navigation  server.  Bioinformatics  25, 
141-143.

