Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(2)  136-140,  June  2009

A  Scheme  for  Filtering  SNPs  Imputed  in  8,842  Korean 
Individuals  Based  on  the  International  HapMap  Project  Data

Kichan  Lee  and  Sangsoo  Kim*

Department  of  Bioinformatics  &  Life  Science,  Soongsil 
University,  Seoul  156-743,  Korea 

Abstract

Genome-wide  association  (GWA)  studies  may  benefit 
from  the  inclusion  of  imputed  SNPs  into  their  dataset. 
Due  to  its  predictive  nature,  the  imputation  process  is 
typically  not  perfect.  Thus,  it  would  be  desirable  to  de-
velop  a  scheme  for  filtering  out  the  imputed  SNPs  by 
maximizing  the  concordance  with  the  observed  geno-
types.  We  report  such  a  scheme,  which  is  based  on  the 
combination  of  several  parameters  that  are  calculated 
by  PLINK,  a  popular  GWA  analysis  software  program. 
We  imputed  the  genotypes  of  8,842  Korean  individuals, 
based  on  approximately  2  million  SNP  genotypes  of  the 
CHB＋JPT  panel  in  the  International  HapMap  Project 
Phase  II  data,  complementing  the  352k  SNPs  in  the 
original  Affymetrix  5.0  dataset.  A  total  of  333,418  SNPs 
were  found  in  both  datasets,  with  a  median  con-
cordance  rate  of  98.7%.  The  concordance  rates  were 
calculated  at  different  ranges  of  parameters,  such  as  the 
number  of  proxy  SNPs  (NPRX),  the  fraction  of  success-
fully  imputed  individuals  (IMPUTED),  and  the  information 
content  (INFO).  The  poor  concordance  that  was  ob-
served  at  the  lower  values  of  the  parameters  allowed  us 
to  develop  an  optimal  combination  of  the  cutoffs 
(IMPUTED≥0.9  and  INFO≥0.9).  A  total  of  1,026,596 
SNPs  passed  the  cutoff,  of  which  94,364  were  found  in 
both  datasets  and  had  99.4%  median  concordance. 
This  study  illustrates  a  conservative  scheme  for  filtering 
imputed  SNPs  that  would  be  useful  in  GWA  studies.

Keywords:  genome-wide  association,  HapMap,  PLINK, 
SNP  imputation

Introduction

Genome-wide  association  (GWA)  studies  that  employ  ul-
trahigh-density  microarray  chips  and  over  several  thou-
sand  samples  have  been  successful  in  mapping  loci 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  sskimb@ssu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-820-0457,  Fax  +82-2-824-4383
Accepted  10  May  2009

that  are  associated  with  diseases  or  epidemiological 
traits.  However,  in  the  course  of  the  analyses,  these 
studies  have  generated  a  large  number  of  false  pos-
itives,  due  to  the  multiple-testing  nature  in  the  statistical 
analysis  or  some  bias  in  sampling.  If  multiple  datasets 
of  the  same  trait  in  different  samples  are  available,  the 
statistical  power  can  be  greatly  improved  by  combining 
the  studies  through  meta-analysis  (de  Bakker  et al., 
2008).  On  the  other  hand,  the  results  from  a  single  da-
taset  are  typically  validated  via  expensive  replication 
studies.  It  would  be  of  great  help  if  the  associations 
could  be  corroborated,  based  on  some  other 
in-
formation,  such  as  linkage  disequilibrium,  that  is  readily 
available  prior  to  the  replication  studies.
    Linkage  disequilibrium  (LD),  the  nonrandom  associa-
tion  of  alleles  at  different  loci,  is  the  result  of  the  evolu-
tionary  history  of  a  population,  involving  mutations,  se-
lection,  recombination,  population  bottlenecks,  and  ran-
dom  genetic  drift  (Xiong  &  Jin  2007).  A  haplotype  is  a 
set  of  co-occurring  polymorphic  alleles  on  the  same 
chromosome.  The  haplotype  block  model  has  particular 
implications  in  the  study  of  dense  markers,  such  as  the 
single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP),  because  it  im-
plies  that  a  smaller  number  of  markers  (tagging  SNPs) 
are  necessary 
to  uniquely  distinguish  different 
haplotypes.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  marker  shows  a 
strong  association  with  a  trait,  then  the  other  markers 
within  the  same  haplotype  block  should  show  the  same 
association.  This  idea  has  been  implemented  in  GWA 
analysis  software  programs,  including  PLINK  (Purcell et 
al.,  2007),  in  various  ways:  direct  association  of  each 
haplotype,  proxy  association,  or  LD-based  clumping. 
These  approaches  require  an  accurate  haplotype  model. 
The  quality  of  the  haplotype  models  in  a  particular  GWA 
dataset  can  be  improved  by  phasing  the  haplotypes, 
based  on  the  background  genotypes  of  the  ultra-
high-density  International  HapMap  data.
    The  International  HapMap  Project  aims  to  produce 
such  valuable  haplotype  information  of  the  human  ge-
nome  (The  International  HapMap  Consortium  2003).  A 
total  of  270  samples,  90  samples  from  each  of  three 
major  ethnic  groups-African,  Asian,  and  European-were 
genotyped,  phased,  and  released  to  the  public  freely 
(Thorisson et al.,  2005).  The  second  phase  of  the  proj-
ect  released  the  genotypes  for  over  2  million  SNPs.  The 
genotypes  of  the  markers  that  were  not  included  in  the 
study  dataset  but  were  included  in  the  reference  data-
set,  the  International  HapMap  dataset,  can  be  inferred  if 

the  surrounding  haplotypes  of  the  study  dataset  are 
compatible  with  those  of  the  reference.  This  is  called 
imputation,  because  it  is  similar  to  filling  in  missing  in-
formation  in  statistical  analysis.  Due  to  its  predictive  na-
ture,  imputation  is  not  perfect  and  is  bound  to  generate 
some  errors.  Hence,  we  need  a  heuristic  scheme  to  re-
duce  the  error.  One  may  estimate  the  imputation  error 
by  calculating  the  concordance  of  the  genotypes  of  a 
marker  in  the  study  dataset  with  those  that  are  imputed 
for  the  same  individual.
    Recently,  a  GWA  study  of  quantitative  traits  with 
8,842  Korean  individuals  (Korea  Association  Resource 
(KARE))  was  reported  (Cho  et al.,  2009).  In  that  study, 
SNP  imputing  and  a  subsequent  association  study  were 
carried  out  with  IMPUTE  (Marchini  et al.,  2007)  and 
SNPTEST  (Marchini et al.,  2007),  respectively,  and  no  fil-
tering  scheme  was  reported.  For  the  same  dataset,  we 
imputed  HapMap  SNPs  using  PLINK;  evaluated  the  con-
cordance  rate  for  various  ranges  of  the  parameters  that 
were  reported  by  PLINK,  a  popular  GWA  analysis  soft-
ware;  and  developed  heuristic  cutoffs  of  those  parame-
ters  for  filtering  out  potentially  poorly  imputed  markers.

Methods

Genotype  and  HapMap  data 

The  genotype  data  that  were  used  in  this  study  were 
previously  reported.  Briefly,  after  standard  quality  control 
steps,  a  total  of  352,228  SNPs  for  8842  individuals  were 
obtained.  We  called  it  the  KARE  (Korean  Association 
Resource)  dataset.  A  total  of  351,677  SNP  IDs  of  the 
dataset  were  converted  from  those  of  Affymetrix  to 
those  of  dbSNP  RefSNP  IDs  using  an  annotation  file 
(Mapping250K_Nsp.na26.annot.csv) 
that  was  down-
loaded  from  the  Affymetrix  website.  Among  them, 
176,059  underwent  strand  flipping  in  order  to  conform 
to  the  +ve  strand  of  NCBI  human  genome  build  36.  The 
genotypes  of 
International 
HapMap  Phase  II  (The  International  HapMap  Consortium 
2005)  were  downloaded 
the  PLINK  website 
(http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/dist/hap-
map_JPT_CHB_r23a_filtered.zip).  The  dataset  contains 
2.2  million  markers  that  had  been  filtered  for  those  that 
had  a  MAF  greater  than  0.01  and  a  genotyping  rate  in 
the  CEU  panel  greater  than  95%.  These  two  datasets 
were  subsequently  merged  into  a  single  set,  followed  by 
a  split  into  each  chromosome  for  parallel  job  submi-
ssions.

the  JPT+CHB  panel  of 

from 

SNP  imputation 

PLINK,  one  of  the  most  popular  GWA  analysis  software 

Filtering  Imputed  SNPs    137

programs,  was  used  for  SNP  imputation.  It  works  by 
phasing  the  haplotypes  of  the  reference  panel  and  using 
it  to  infer  the  alleles  of  the  study  panel.  For  phasing 
haplotypes,  PLINK  uses  an  EM  algorithm.  The  SNPs  of 
the  study  panel  that  are  in  LD  with  the  imputed  SNP  are 
called  proxies.  If  the  genotypes  of  these  proxies  in 
some  individuals  in  the  study  panel  are  not  compatible 
with  any  of  the  haplotypes  of  the  reference  panel,  the 
genotypes  for  these  individuals  cannot  be  imputed. 
PLINK  reports  the  number  of  individuals  who  have  suc-
cessful  imputation  for  each  marker.  The  quality  of  im-
putation  is  often  estimated  by  the  variance  of  the  im-
puted  allele  dosage  relative  to  that  expected  from  the 
reference  panel.  PLINK  reports  this  parameter  as  INFO 
(de  Bakker  et al.,  2008).  PLINK  also  reports  the  con-
cordance  rate  for  each  maker  in  the  study  panel  .  All  of 
the  PLINK  jobs  were  performed  on  the  128-CPU  cluster 
at  Korean  Bioinformation  Center  (http://www.kobic.re.kr). 
The  results  from  PLINK  runs  were  analyzed  using  locally 
developed  R  scripts.

Results

The  KARE  genotype  data  were  merged  with  those  of 
the  International  HapMap  Phase  II  JPT＋CHB  panel,  re-
sulting  in  a  total  of  2,168,896  SNPs  (CJK  dataset).  The 
genotypes  of  the  KARE  data  were  imputed  using  PLINK, 
based  on  the  background  haplotypes  of  the  reference 
panel  (the  PLINK  option  “--proxy-impute  all”).  Among 
351,766 SNPs in the KARE dataset (called  “OBSERVED”), 
333,418  were  also  found  in  the  reference  panel  (called 
“OVERLAP”).  The  concordance  rates  for  these  SNPs 
were  calculated,  wherein  the  first  quartile  and  median 
were  0.964  and  0.987,  respectively.  We  surveyed  the 
concordance  rates  at  various  intervals  of  key  parame-
ters  that  were  reported  by  PLINK.  First,  we  examined 
the  trend  by  the  Hardy-Weinberg  equilibrium  (HWE)  p 
value  (PHWE).  Fig.  1A  shows  the  boxplot  of  the  con-
cordance  rates  at  each  bin  of  -log10  (PHWE).  The  inter-
quartile  range  (IQR)  that  corresponds  to  the  vertical  di-
mension  of  the  box  increases  as  the  deviation  from 
HWE  increases.  While  the  third  quartile  remains  virtually 
the  same,  the  first  quartile  drops  significantly  with  the 
increased  deviation  from  HWE.  The  combination  of  IQR 
and  the  first  quartile  is  represented  by  the  lower 
“whisker,”  which  also  shows  a  dramatic  decrease  at  se-
vere  deviation  from  HWE.  At  the  rightmost  bin,  where 
PHWE＜10
702  OVERLAP  markers  in  this  bin.  We  decided  to  ex-
clude  markers  that  had  PHWE＜10
“whisker”  of  the  concordance  rate  dropped  substan-
tially.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  original  KARE  analysis 
also  used  a  similar  HWE  cutoff  (Cho  et al.,  2009).

−7,  the  concordance  was  extremely  poor  for 
−6,  where  the  lower 

138    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(2)  136-140,  June  2009

A

C

B

D

Fig.  1.  Distribution  of  the  concordance  rates  at  each  bin  of  the  parameters  reported  by  PLINK.  The  concordance  between
the  observed  genotypes  and  imputed  ones  are  viewed  via  boxplots  for  the  bins  of  (A)  −log10  (PHWE),  where  PHWE  is  the 

Hardy-Weinberg  Equilibrium  p  value;  (B)  IMPUTED,  the  fraction  of  imputed  individuals  in  the  KARE  panel;  (C)  INFO,  the  rela-
tive  variance  of  allele  frequency  of  the  imputed  alleles;  and  (D)  NPRX,  the  number  of  proxy  SNPs  for  each  observed  marker.

this  case)  with 

    The  imputation  process  in  PLINK  is  based  on  the  hap-
lotype  that  is  formed  by  the  neighboring  markers  within 
the  LD  block  (so-called  “proxies”).  By  comparing  the 
genotypes  of  the  proxies  from  the  study  panel  (KARE, 
in 
reference  panel 
(HapMap),  the  compatible  haplotypes  are  chosen  and 
the  alleles  are  assigned.  If  no  compatible  haplotypes  are 
found  for  some  of  the  individuals,  their  alleles  cannot  be 
assigned.  PLINK  provides  a  parameter  called  IMPUTED, 
which  is  the  fraction  of  individuals  whose  genotypes 

those  of 

the 

were  able  to  be  imputed.  It  is  implied  that  the  haplotype 
structures  of  the  study  panel  are  less  compatible  with 
those  of  the  reference  panel  as  IMPUTED  drops  below 
1.  With  the  increase  of  the  incompatible  fraction,  the 
concordance  is  expected  to  drop.  The  concordance  rate 
at  each  bin  of  IMPUTED  is  summarized  in  Fig.  1B.  While 
the  concordance  at  the  rightmost  bin  was  excellent, 
substantial  deterioration  in  concordance  was  noticed  as 
IMPUTED  dropped.  The  relative  variance  of  the  imputed 
alleles  of  a  marker  is  given  as  a  parameter  called  INFO 

Filtering  Imputed  SNPs    139

Table  1.  Distribution  of  concordance  rates  for  various  cutoffs

Cutoff

Imputeda

Overlapb

None
PHWE＞10
PHWE＞10
PHWE＞10
PHWE＞10

−6
−6,  IMPUTED≥0.9
−6,  INFO≥0.9
−6,  IMPUTED≥0.9,  INFO≥0.9

2,168,896
1,910,471
1,323,616
1,098,100
1,026,596

333,418
332,631
229,716
194,492
94,364

Lower 
whiskerc

0.916
0.916
0.952
0.965
0.966

1st  quartilec

Medianc

3rd  quartilec

0.964
0.964
0.979
0.984
0.985

0.987
0.987
0.992
0.993
0.994

0.996
0.996
0.997
0.997
0.998

Higher 
whiskerc

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

aNumber  of  all  the  SNP  markers  imputed.
bNumber  of  markers  overlapping  between  KARE  and  HapMap  Phase  II  JPT＋CHB  datasets.
cBoxplot  statistics  of  the  concordance  rates.

(de  Bakker et al.,  2008).  Similar  to  IMPUTED,  INFO  is  al-
so  expected  to  show  the  compatibility  in  the  haplotype 
structures  of  the  two  panels.  Indeed,  we  noticed  sig-
nificant  deterioration  in  concordance  at  lower  INFO  val-
ues  (Fig.  1C).  One  might  anticipate  that  the  more  prox-
ies  that  are  used,  the  more  reliable  the  imputation  is. 
Interestingly,  the  concordance  was  somewhat  poorer 
with  more  proxies  (Fig.  1D).  Currently  we  have  no  ex-
planation  for  this,  except  that  it  might  manifest  in-
creased  errors  in  haplotype  phasing  by  the  EM  algo-
rithm  for  cases  that  have  many  proxies.
    The  monotonous  change  in  the  concordance  rate 
along  these  parameters  allows  development  of  cutoffs 
for  filtering  out  poorly  imputed  markers.  Application  of 
these  cutoffs  inevitably  loses  some  well-imputed  mark-
ers  and  retains  some  poorly  imputed  ones.  A  combina-
tion  of  the  cutoffs  is  expected  to  improve  the  overall 
concordance  rate  even  more.  Table  1  shows  the  con-
cordance  statistics  at  various  cutoffs.  Introduction  of  a 
cutoff  that  was  based  on  PHWE  alone  did  not  demon-
strate  the  improvement  in  the  statistics,  because  the 
number  of  markers  that  were  removed  among  OVERLAP 
was  merely  787  (0.2%).  However,  it  removed  approx-
imately  10%  of  all  of  the  imputed  markers.  An  additional 
condition  of  IMPUTED≥0.9  dramatically  improved  the 
lower  whisker  from  0.916  to  0.952,  at  the  expense  of 
about  1/3  of  markers.  The  cutoff  that  was  based  on 
INFO  had  an  even  higher  impact.  A  combination  of  all 
three  cutoffs  showed  the  most  improvement,  although 
the  statistics 
improved  marginally.  One 
might  argue  that  IMPUTED  and  INFO  are  correlated  and 
that  only  one  of  them  would  be  necessary.  On  the  con-
trary,  the  combination  of  all  three  cutoffs  retained  only 
about  1/3  of  the  original  markers.  If  both  parameters 
had  been  well  correlated,  we  would  not  have  seen  such 
a  remarkable  reduction  in  surviving  markers.  In  fact,  the 
correlation  coefficient  between  INFO  and  IMPUTED  for 
the  1,026,596  markers  that  survived  the  combined  cut-
offs  was  0.41353.

themselves 

Discussion

improved 

the  concordance 

reasonably 

the  observed  and 

This  study  intended  to  evaluate  the  performance  of 
PLINK  in  imputing  SNPs  for  the  KARE  population  based 
on  International  HapMap  Phase  II  JPT＋CHB.  The  im-
putation  performance  was  measured  in  terms  of  the 
concordance  between 
imputed 
genotypes.  Correlations  between  the  concordance  rate 
and  several  parameters  that  were  reported  by  PLINK 
were  noticed,  allowing  us  to  develop  a  heuristic  cutoff 
that 
rate. 
However,  the  application  of  such  a  cutoff  inevitably 
caused  the  elimination  of  nearly  half  of  the  markers.  If 
all  of  the  HapMap  SNPs  had  been  retained  and  well  im-
puted,  the  marker  density  would  have  been  increased 
by  6-fold  from  the  original  KARE  marker  density. 
Consequently,  the  increase  in  the  marker  density  at  this 
filtering  was  only  3-fold,  which  is  still  substantially  dens-
er  than  the  original  dataset.  Such  an  expanded  dataset 
would  allow  us  to  analyze  the  haplotype  structure 
around  a  marker  that  shows  an  association  with  traits. 
The  subsequent  analysis,  based  on  haplotype  associa-
tion,  would  be  a  powerful  tool,  filtering  out  unlikely  as-
sociation  signals  that  might  be  caused  by  some  non-
genotyping  errors.  Stable  association  of  the  haplotype 
that  encompasses  the  original  association  signal  from 
the  unimputed  dataset  would  corroborate  that  original 
association.  Another  application  of  the  imputed  dataset 
would  be  to  discover  an  imputed  marker,  if  any,  that  is 
nearby  the  original  one  and  shows  a  stronger  associa-
tion  than  it.  However,  any  association  signal  from  the 
imputed  markers  should  be  scrutinized  carefully,  be-
cause  they  are  not  directly  observed  experimentally  and 
the  imputation  process  cannot  be  perfect.
    It  should  be  noted  that  the  imputation  work  that  is 
presented  here  has  some  limitations.  The  fact  that  half 
of  the  imputed  SNPs  had  to  be  filtered  out  indicates  a 
substantial  difference  in  haplotype  structures  between 
the  HapMap  and  KARE  population.  It  would  not  empha-

140    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(2)  136-140,  June  2009

from  each  other  than 

size  the  ethnic  differences  between  Chinese,  Japanese, 
and  Koreans,  because  Chinese  and  Japanese  are  ge-
netically  more  distant 
from 
Koreans  (Ahn  et al.,  2009).  The  haplotype  difference 
may  be  attributed  to  the  difference  in  sample  size. 
Merging  45  Chinese  and  Japanese  each  to 
form 
90-individual  genotype  data  may  not  capture  the  full 
spectra  of  haplotypes  that  are  present  in  8842  in-
dividuals  of  the  KARE  data.  In  other  words,  the  hap-
lotype  structures  that  are  formed  by  the  HapMap 
JPT+CHB  would  be  accurate,  considering  the  extremely 
high-density  SNP  markers.  Although  they  may  capture 
major  haplotypes  in  an  East  Asian  population,  they  may 
miss  some  low-frequency  haplotypes  that  are  present  in 
the  East  Asian  population,  due  to  limited  sample  size. 
Further  study  that  compares  the  haplotype  structures  of 
these  two  datasets  would  clarify  this  point. 

Acknowledgments

The  KARE  genotype  and  epidemiological  data  were 
gratefully  made  available  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Health,  Korea  Center  for  Disease  Control,  which  sup-
ported  this  work  through  a  grant  to  the  KARE  Analysis 
Consortium.  SK  would  like  to  thank  the  help  and  sup-
port  of  all  of  the  staff  at  KNIH.  The  computing  cluster 
that  was  used  in  this  study  was  kindly  granted  from  the 
Korean  Bio-Information  Center  (KOBIC).

References

Ahn,  S.M.,  Kim,  T.H.,  Lee,  S., et al.  (2009).  The  first  Korean 

genome  sequence  and  analysis:  full  genome  sequencing 
for  a  socio-ethnic  group.  Genome  Res.  published  in 
advance.

de  Bakker,  P.I.W.,  Ferreira,  M.A.R.,  Xioming,  J.,  Neale, 
B.M.,  Raychaudhuri,  S.,  and  Voicht,  B.F.  (2008).  Practical 
aspects  of 
imputation-driven  meta-analysis  of  ge-
nome-wide  association  studies.  Hum. Mol. Genet.  17, 
R122-128.

Cho,  Y.S.,  Go,  M.J.,  Kim,  Y.J.,  et al.  (2009).  A  large-scale 
genome-wide  association  study  of  Asian  populations  un-
cover  genetic  factors  influencing  eight  quantitative  traits. 
Nat. Genet.  41,  527-534.

Marchini,  J.,  Howie,  B.,  Myers,  S.,  McVean,  G.,  and 
Donnelly,  P.  (2007).  A  new  multipoint  method  for  ge-
nome-wide  association  studies  by  imputation  of  geno-
types.  Nat. Genet.  39,  906-913.

Purcell,  S.,  Neale,  B.,  Todd-Brown,  K.,  Thomas,  L.,  Ferreira, 
M.A.,  Bender,  D.,  Maller,  J.,  Sklar,  P.,  de  Bakker,  P.I.W., 
Daly,  M.J., et al.  (2007).  PLINK:  a  tool  set  for  whole-ge-
nome  association  and  population-based  linkage  analyses. 
Am. J. Hum. Genet.  81,  559-575.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2003).  The  Interna-

tional  HapMap  Project.  Nature  426,  789-796.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2005).  A  Haplotype 

Map  of  the  Human  Genome.  Nature  437,  1299-1320.

Thorisson,  G.A.,  Smith,  A.V.,  Krishnan,  L.,  and  Stein,  L.D. 
International  HapMap  Project  Web  site. 

(2005).  The 
Genome Res.  15,  1591-1593. 

Xiong,  M.,  and  Jin,  L.  (2007).  Association  Studies  of 
Complex  Diseases.  In Bioinformatics - From Genomes to 
Therapies  Vol.  3,  T.  Lengauer,  ed.  (Wiley-VCH,  Germany), 
pp.1375-1426

