Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  223-226,  December  2008

Computational  Approach  for  the  Analysis  of  Post-PKS 
Glycosylation  Step

Ki-Bong  Kim1*  and  Kiejung  Park2

1Department  of  Bioinformatics  Engineering,  Sangmyung 
University,  Cheonan  330-720,  Korea,  2SmallSoft  Co., 
Deajeon  305-728,  Korea

Abstract

We  introduce  a  computational  approach  for  analysis  of 
glycosylation  in  Post-PKS  tailoring  steps.  It  is  a  compu-
tational  method  to  predict  the  deoxysugar  biosynthesis 
unit  pathway  and  the  substrate  specificity  of  glycosyl-
transferases  involved  in  the  glycosylation  of  polyketides. 
In  this  work,  a  directed  and  weighted  graph  is  in-
troduced  to  represent  and  predict  the  deoxysugar  bio-
synthesis  unit  pathway.  In  addition,  a  homology  based 
gene  clustering  method  is  used  to  predict  the  substrate 
specificity  of  glycosyltransferases.  It  is  useful  for  the  ra-
tional  design  of  polyketide  natural  products,  which  leads 
to  in silico  drug  discovery.

Availability:  The  trial  version  of  this  system  is  available 
via  WWW  at  http://sm.hacklib.com/.

Keywords:  glycosylation,  post-PKS  tailoring  step,  glyco-
syltransferase,  deoxysugar  biosynthesis  unit  pathway

Introduction

The  progress  of  microbial  genetics  in  recent  years  has 
greatly  enhanced  our  ability  to  understand  and  thereby 
rationally  alter  the  biosynthesis  of  various  biologically 
important  natural  products,  especially  polyketides  (Ya-
dav et al.,  2003).  Polyketides  are  a  large  family  of  natu-
ral  products  with  diverse  chemical  structures  and  a 
broad  range  of  pharmacological  effects,  including  anti-
bacterial,  antifungal,  antiparasitic,  anticancer  and  im-
munosuppressive  activities  (Staunton  and  Weissman, 
2001).  These  secondary  metabolites  have  been  charac-
terized  in  a  wide  range  of  organisms.  Polyketide  biosyn-
thesis  resembles  fatty  acid  assembly  and  is  catalyzed 
by  a  collection  of  enzyme  activities  called  polyketide 
synthases  (PKSs)  (Hopwood  and  Sherman,  1990).  The 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  kbkim@smu.ac.kr
Tel  +82-41-550-5377,  Fax  +82-41-550-5184
Accepted  15  October  2008

structural  variety  of  polyketides  is  given  by  the  options 
in  choice  of  starter/extending  units,  number  of  con-
densations,  and  degree  of  subsequent  reductive  cycles, 
all  of  which  being  conferred  by  polyketide  synthase  and 
closely  related  enzymes.  Many  of  these  compounds  and 
their  semi-synthetic  derivatives  are  used  today  in  the 
clinic. 
    The  area  of  biosynthetic  engineering  of  the  enzymes 
(i.e.  PKSs)  involved  in  polyketide  biosynthesis  has  ad-
vanced  recently  to  obtain  various  compounds  of  polyke-
tide  origin  (Tae et al.,  2007).  The  biosynthesis  of  a  typi-
cal  polyketide  can  be  divided  into  three  separate  steps, 
including  (i)  the  choice  of  starter  unit,  (ii)  the  choice  of 
extender  units  and  the  degree  of  beta-keto  group  re-
duction,  and  (iii)  the  post-PKS  tailoring  of  the  basic  pol-
yketide  backbone.  The  tailoring  steps  catalyzed  mainly 
by  oxidoreductases  and  group  transferases  are  crucial 
for  the  addition  of  important  functional  groups  to  poly-
ketide  skeletons  and  are  key  to  the  structural  diversity 
and  biological  activity  of  this  class  of  natural  products 
(Rix  et al.,  2002). 
    Among  group  transfer  reactions,  glycosyltransfer  ones 
are  perhaps 
important  biotransformation. 
Glycosyltransferases  are  responsible  for  the  attachment 
of  sugar  moieties,  often  deoxysugars,  which  add  im-
portant  features  to  the  shape  and  the  stereo-electronic 
properties  of  a  molecule  and  often  play  an  essential  role 
in  the  biological  activity  of  many  natural  product  drugs 
(Rix et al.,  2002).  Thus,  glycosyltransferases  are  and  will 
become  more  and  more  important  tools  for  combinato-
rial  biosynthetic  approaches.  In  this  respect,  our  study 
focuses  on  developing  the  computational  tools  for  the 
substrate  prediction  of  a  given  glycosyltransferase  (GT) 
and  the  prediction  of  deoxysuguar  biosynthesis  unit 
pathway.  The  deoxysugar  is  synthesized  by  diverse  bio-
synthetic  enzymes  and  functions  as  a  substrate  of  GTs.

the  most 

Features  and  Results

Our  computational  system  developed  in  this  work  has 
3-tier  architecture  which  is  composed  of  a  client,  an  ap-
plication  server,  and  a  back-end  database  server  (Fig. 
1).  The  application  server  consists  of  major  three  mod-
ules  -  pathway  analysis  module,  GT  analysis  module 
and  back-office  module.  The  pathway  analysis  module 
is 
(Sugar  Biosynthesis  Pathway 
Database)  search  and  sugar  biosynthesis  unit  pathway 
prediction  and  drawing.  The  main  procedure  of  pathway 

in  SBPD 

involved 

224    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  223-226,  December  2008

Fig.  1.  The  system  frame  with  3-tier  client-server  archi-
tecture.  It  has three  essential components -  a  client, an 
application  server,  and  a  back-end  database  server.

Fig.  2.  The  main  procedure  of  the  prediction  and  draw-
ing  of  sugar  biosynthesis  unit  pathways.

 

Fig.  3.  An  exemplary  pathway  maps  for  sugar  biosynthesis  unit.  The  drawing  engine  in  pathway  analysis  module 
provides  not  only  an  integrated  pathway  map  (a)  but  also  all  possible  component  paths  (b).

prediction  and  drawing  can  be  described  as  follows 
(Fig.  2):  (A)  Given  an  enzyme  as  a  start  node  and  a  list 
of  enzymes  as  input  data,  the  case  extraction  engine 
calculates  all  possible  combinatorial  routes  of  input 
enzymes.  (B)  The  graph  route  maker  generates  node 
(i.e.  sugar)  and  edge  (i.e.  enzyme)  data  after  applying 

the  route  information  in  the  SPDB.  (C)  Finally,  the  draw-
ing  engine  generates  graph  data  objects  from  graph 
route  data  and  draws  the  pathway  maps  (Fig.  3).  A  di-
rected  and  weighted  graph  theory  is  employed  to  repre-
sent  and  predict  all  possible  biosynthesis  unit  pathways 
with  a  given  enzyme  set. 

Computational  Approach  for  the  Analysis  of  Post-PKS  Glycosylation  Step    225

Fig.  4.  The  schemata  of  GTDB  and  SBPD  (a).  The  GTDB  consists  of  four  tables,  each  of  which  contains  the  in-
formation  extracted  from  CAZY,  GenBank,  PDB  and  UniProt  respectively  (b).  The  SBPD  has  three  tables  that  are 
Enzyme,  Relation  and  Sugar.

    The  GT  analysis  module  undertakes  GTDB  (Glycosyl 
Transferase  Database)  search  and  GT-encoding  gene 
clustering  and  mapping.  We  used  BLAST  program 
(Altschul  et al.,  1990)  to  cluster  and  map  GT-encoding 
genes  on  the  input  genomic  sequence,  where  GTDB  is 
used  as  a  target  database  of  BLAST  program.  The  third 
part  is  back-office  module  that  is  in  charge  of  user  au-
thentication,  SBPD  management  and  GTDB  manage-
ment.  Using  this  module,  system  manager  can  access, 
update  and  manage  the  back-end  databases  with  ease 
and  security.
    The  back-end  databases  consist  of  SBPD  and  GTDB 
that  are  implemented  as  a  relational  database  using 
MySQL  database  management  system.  The  SBPD  data-
base  is  specifically  designed  for  the  sugar  biosynthesis 
related  to  post-PKS  tailoring  step  and  has  three  main 
tables  -  Enzyme,  Relation,  and  Sugar  (Fig.  4).  The  in-
formation  in  SBPD  is  collected  from  two  different  sour-
ces:  experimental  data  produced  in  our  joint  laboratory 
and  reviewed  publications.  Using  back-office  module, 
system  manager  and  authenticated  users  can  also  add 
new  data  to  this  database.  The  GTDB  database  is  com-
posed  of  four  tables  (i.e.  gt,  genbank,  pdb3d,  and  uni-
prot)  (Fig.  4)  and  the  information  in  this  database  is 
mainly  collected  from  CAZY  system  (http://www.caz-
y.org)  by  means  of  parsing  and  reengineering.  The 
CAZY  database  describes  the  families  of  structurally-re-
lated  catalytic  and  carbohydrate-binding  modules  (or 
functional  domains)  of  enzymes  that  degrade,  modify,  or 
create  glycosidic  bonds.  It  features  five  classes  of  en-
zymes  -  glycoside  hydrolases  (GH),  glycosyl  trans-

ferases  (GT),  polysaccharide  lyases  (PL),  carbohydrate 
esterases 
(CE),  and  carbohydrate  binding  modules 
(CBM).

Discussion

Polyketides  are  the  components  of  a  vast  variety  of  mi-
crobial  and  plant  secondary  metabolites,  including  bio-
logically  active  compounds  such  as  antibiotics.  As  men-
tioned  above,  the  structural  variety  of  polyketides  is  giv-
en  by  the  options  in  choice  of  starter/extending  units, 
number  of  condensations,  and  degree  of  subsequent  re-
ductive  cycles,  all  of  which  being  conferred  by  PKS  and 
closely  related  enzymes.  In  addition,  subsequent  post- 
PKS  tailoring  steps  provide  the  final  product  with  further 
structural  variations.  In  this  context,  we  developed  the 
computational  system  for  the  analysis  of  post-PKS  gly-
cosylation  step.
    Our  system  carries  the  prediction  and  drawing  of  de-
oxysugar  biosynthesis  unit  pathway,  SBPD  and  GTDB 
searches,  GT-encoding  gene  clustering,  and  back-office 
management.  The  deduced  sugar  biosynthesis  unit 
pathway  can  allow  us  to  determine  and  design  the  ap-
propriate  sugar  that  can  be  a  substrate  for  glycosyl-
transferases  and  be  employed  in  the  glycosylation  of 
polyketides.  The  practical  use  of  analysis  result  can  pro-
vide  researchers  with  the  opportunity  to  conduct  meta-
bolic  engineering  of  deoxysugar  genes  in  collaboration 
with  experimental  work.  The  GT-encoding  gene  cluster-
ing  and  mapping  may  give  clue  to  glycosyltransferase 
genes,  each  of  which  can  be  assigned  to  a  specific  GT 

226    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(4)  223-226,  December  2008

reaction  in  biosynthesis.  They  usually  possess  regional 
and  mechanistic  specificities:  α-(1,3)-glycosylation  for 
UrdGT1c;  β-(1,4)-glycosylation  for  UrdGT1b.  A  series  of 
their  chimeric  GT  genes  can  be  constructed,  and  ex-
pressed  in  a  mutants  lacking  corresponding  glycosyl-
transfer  activity  to  find  the  region  determining  the  sub-
strate  specificities.  Metabolic  engineering  to  the  region, 
including  DNA  shuffling,  gives  rise  to  the  novel  GT  spe-
cificities  leading  to  unnatural  derivatives.  Our  system 
may  be  useful  for  experiment  researchers  to  rationally 
design  a  novel  polyketide  and  derivatives  with  biological 
activities. 

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  supported  by  MOCIE  grants  from  Intelli-
gence  Bioinformatics  and  Application  Center,  KRIBB 
and  also  financially  supported  by  MEST  and  KOTEF 
through  Human  Resource  Training  Project.

References

Altschul,  S.F.,  Gish,  W.,  Miller,  W.,  Myers,  E.W.,  and 
Lipman,  D.J.  (1990).  Basic  local  alignment  search  tool. J. 
Mol. Biol.  213,  403-410.

Hopwood,  D.A.,  and  Sherman,  D.H.  (1990).  Molecular  ge-
netics  of  polyketides  and  its  comparison  with  Fatty  acid 
biosynthesis.  Annu. Rev. Genet.  24,  37-66. 

Carbohydrate  Active  Enzymes  database  site.  http://www. 

cazy.org.

Rix,  U.,  Fischer,  C.,  Remsing,  L.,  and  Rohr,  J.  (2002). 
Modification  of  post-PKS  tailoring  steps  through  combi-
natorial  biosynthesis.  Nat. Prod. Rep.  19,  542-580.

Staunton,  J.,  and  Weissman,  K.  (2001).  Polyketide  biosyn-
thesis:  a  millennium  review. Nat. Prod. Rep.  18,  380-416. 
Yadav,  G.,  Gokhale,  R.S.,  and  Mohanty,  D.  (2003).  Compu-
tational  Approach  for  prediction  of  Domain  Organization 
and  Substrate  Specificity  of  Modular  Polyketide  Syn-
thases.  J. Mol. Biol.  328,  335-363.

