Genomics & Informatics  Vol.  2(4) 167-173, December 2004 

The Atom of Evolution 

·

·

·

3

2

4 

Jonghwa  Bhak1
Yoobok Ch~, Kiesuk Yoo~, Semin Lee1
Gong\  lnsoo  Jang2
Huston3  and Hwanho Choi3 

·,  Dan  Bolser·5 ,  Daeui  Park4, 
,  SungSam 
,  Changbum  Park\  Maryana 

1Biomatics  Lab,  BioSystems,  KAIST,  Daejeon  305-701, 
Korea,  2NGIC,  KRIBB,  Daejeon  305-333,  Korea,  3Bi0 
Institute,  Daejeon  305-701,  Korea,  4 0ITEK  Inc.  Daejeon 
305-701,  Korea,  5 MRC-DUNN,  Cambridge CB2-2XY, 
England,  United  Kingdom. 

Abstract 
The  main  mechanism  of  evolution  is  that  biological 
entities change, are selected, and reproduce. We propose 
a different concept in terms of the main agent or atom of 
evolution: in the biological world, not an individual object, 
but  its  interactive  network  is  the  fundamental  unit  of 
evolution.  The  interaction  network  is  composed  of 
interaction  pairs  of information  objects that  have  order 
information.  This  indicates  a  paradigm  shift  from  3D 
biological  objects to  an  abstract  network of information 
entities as the primary agent of evolution.  It forces us to 
change  our  views  about  how  organisms  evolve  and 
therefore the methods we use to analyze evolution. 

Keywords:  interactome,  comparative  interactomics,  netvl.ork 
biology, interfaceome, biological information objects 

Introduction 
Bioinformatics and paradigm shift. 
Bioinformatics  is  a  scientific  discipline  that  analyzes, 
seeks  understanding  of,  and  models  all  life  as  an 
information processing phenomenon on  utilizing energy 
with  methods 
from  philosophy,  mathematics,  and 
computer  science  using  biological  experimental  data. 
Due to its information processing  nature,  bioinformatics 
is one of the broadest and deepest scientific disciplines. 
All  biological  research  is,  aiming  to  understand  the 
architecture  of  information  processing 
life.  For 
example,  the  analysis  of  genomes  and  genes  is  to 

in 

*Corresponding author:  E-mail j@bio.cc, 
Tel +82-42-869-4318,  Fax +82-42-869-4310 
Accepted  3 October 2004 

discover  the  underlying  linguistic  rules  of  molecules 
(Searls,  1993)  and 
the  concept  of  proteins  as 
computational elements (Bray,  1995). In this sense, the 
shortest  possible  definition  of  bioinformatics 
is: 
Bioinformatics  is  Biology and  Biology is  Bioinformatics. 
In the next 20 years, bioinformatics will become the core 
of biological education even in secondary school biology 
courses.  The  early  2000s  is  at  the  point  where  the 
conventional views of molecular biology should  change 
with  new revolutionary views in  biology.  One of them  is 
the  transition  from  the  conventional  object-oriented 
understanding  of  biology  to  an 
interaction-oriented 
understanding. 

Objects and interaction 
The  concept  of  evolution  is  the  backbone  of  modern 
biology  (Darwin,  1859).  Evolution  is  used  to  explain 
development  and  change  in  many  different  areas  of 
human  society.  The  word  evolution  is  from  the  Latin 
evolvere meaning "unfold".  It succinctly means "descent 
with  modification  of objects",  whatever the  objects are. 
For  example,  although  a  car  is  not  a  self-replicating 
organic  organism,  an  evolutionary  process  appears  to 
have occurred in car models. The cars were duplicated, 
changed,  and  selected  as  a  result  of the  interaction  of 
manufacturers  and  users:  by  observing  the  users' 
selection 
the 
manufacturers  made  design  decisions  for  each  new 
model. As abstract information objects, the cars evolved 
as  much  as  human  hair  evolved  over  time.  Hair  is  a 
product of hair cells while cars are the product of human 
brain  cells.  Here, 
in 
development are  the  interaction  and  information  rather 
than  the  objects  themselves.  This  leads  us  to  the 
question of what the fundamental evolutionary unit is  in 
interaction processes. 

through  market 

the  more 

influential 

research, 

factors 

and 

Discussion 
1.  The  fundamental  unit  of  evolution  is  the 
interaction pairs of biological information objects. 
Among  many  biological 
levels, 
cell-cell  interactions  are  not  the  most  basic  unit  of 
evolution,  as  non-cellular  entities,  such  as  molecules 
and  viruses,  show  evolutionary  processes.  Use  of the 

information  object 

168  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 167-173,  December2004 

sbuctures:  There  is  nearly  an  infinite  number  protein 
sequences. At this very moment, new proteins are being 
synthesized  by  some  unknown  organisms  as constant 
mutations occur in nature. Due to this ongoing process, it 
is  theoretically  not  possible  to  map  all  the  protein 
sequences. However, there seem to be fewer than 2000 
distinct protein folds that represent the infinite number of 
protein  sequences.  In  a small  bactrium,  2000  types  of 
interaction  nodes can  have enough  specificity to  avoid 
misinteraction.  However,  in a large eukaryotic cell,  with 
the  given  3D  molecular  objects,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid 
misinteraction.  A  protein  domain  can  have  several 
different  specificity  and  specific  interaction  interfaces; 
however, with many paralogs within a single-cell bag,  it 
still reaches the theoretical limit to control misinteractions. 
Inevitably,  this  selection  force,  in  order  to  have  more 
diverse interaction types and their functions,  drove cells 
to  compartmentalize.  This  is  an  object  and  function 
encapsulation  to  make  higher  complexity 
information 
architecture. 

2.3.  Protein  folding  is a molecular interaction  problem: 
Misinteraction  between  amino  acid  residues  within  a 
protein leads to problems in the protein folding process in 
general.  Protein  folding  in  action  is  an  interaction 
problem. Protein regions and amino acid regions interact 
with other regions and residues to form a network that is 
evolutionarily  conserved  due  to  order  information  kept 
over billions of years. The protein folding problem can be 
divided 
interaction 
problems. The local interaction problem is the secondary 
structure formation  and  prediction problem.  How amino 
acids  interact  locally  determines  the  alpha  helix,  beta 
sheet,  and  other  structures.  The  regularity  is  such 
humans  can  predict  the  secondary  structures  very 
reliably  using  algorithms  such  as  neural  networks. 
However,  no  algorithms  have  yet  reached  an  average 
accuracy over 80%.  This  is  because the  long  distance 
interaction information of proteins is missing. 

long-distance 

into 

local  and 

Fig.  1.  Two  interacting molecules:  a protein  complex of two 
structural  domains.  Domains  are  perhaps 
the  most 
fundamental biological unit  giving any meaning or function in 
life. 

molecular  level  was  our  choice  out  of  a  number  of 
possible levels found in the evolution of life. Unlike cells, 
genes  and  proteins  at  the  molecular  level  contain 
important  biological  information  as  ordered  data.  The 
interaction process we suggest as the most basic unit of 
evolution  lies  at  the  molecular  level  where  individual 
genes  and  proteins  interact  as  special  information 
objects  with  consistently  ordered  sequences  (Fig.  1 ). 
Below  and  above  this  level,  it  is  not  easy  to  define 
structural or sequence order information. 

that  maintains 

interacting  molecular  pair  with 

2. Interaction networks 
internal  order 
An 
information  is  the  most  basic  unit of evolution  with  the 
potential  of  being  selected.  An  interaction  network  is 
defined  as  a  system 
its  pairing 
architecture over time.  All  information  objects,  such  as 
genes  and  proteins,  "know''  precisely  with  what  other 
molecules they should  or should  not interact within that 
network. The interaction network as the sum of molecular 
interaction  pairs,  is  the  most  conserved  information 
entity  in  biology.  We  will  discuss  several  issues  and 
research  development  toward  molecular  interaction 
network in the following sections. 

2.1.  Misinteraction:  Many  diseases 
including  BSE 
(bovine  spongiform  encephalopathy  or  mad  cow 
disease)  are  the  result  of  the  wrong  interaction  of 
proteins. that is said to be the cause of BSE is,  in fact,  a 
kind  of  misinteraction.  In  the  evolution  of  proteins, 
avoiding  misinteraction  is  extremely  important.  Most 
venoms and toxins work by causing such misinteractions 
in cells.  For many proteins' evolution, it is perhaps more 
important to avoid undesired interactions than to find the 
desired interaction partners. 

2.2.  Complexity  of cells and  cell  canparbnentalization 
caused  by  the  limited  interaction  specificity  of protein 

2.4.  Protein  folding  interaction  type  ratio  is  79:  21: 
Therefore,  one can  hypothesize that the  ratio  between 
the local and long-distance molecular interaction ratio in 
protein folding  is about 80:20.  A test was carried  out to 
measure the correct ratio  using the reversed  sequence 
set of protein  structures from  PDB  (Protein  DataBank: 
http://rcsb.org).  It  turned  out  that  79%  of  the  protein 
structures  have  the  same  secondary  structures  (local 
residue interaction) regardless of the order of the protein 
sequences  (Park  et a/.,  2000).  Therefore,  the  precise 
ratio of the local and long-distance molecular interaction 
ratio  in  protein  folding  is  suggested  to  be  79:21.  By 

The Atom of Evolution  169 

Fig.  2.  An interaction network. Nodes are interacting protein domain families. Nodes with red characters are hub nodes. 
The multiple alignments show the interaction interfaces that belong to the interfaceome of proteins. The 30 pictures show 
the interacting domains with their interfaces highlighted. 

devising  a method  to  detect  21%  of the  long-distance 
interaction  network  information,  one  may  be  able  to 
solve the protein folding problem computationally. 

2.5.  Interaction  nebM>rk  is  tight:  Due  to  the  risk  of 
misinteraction,  biological  networks  are  extremely 
conservative  (Park  and  Bolser,  2001 ).  The  interaction 
backbone of any interactome is very similar to all  other 
known life forms. With the analysis of over 140 genomes, 
it is clear that there is a unique interactome core found by 
a comparative interactomics (manuscript in submission). 
The core interaction has the most critical functions of life 
such  as  RNA  binding,  energy  metabolism,  and 
translation machineries. 

tightness  of 

2.6.  Driving  of evolution  by  old  and  important families: 
The 
interactome  can  also  be 
demonstrated  by  the  small  number  of  protein  families 
that  seem  to  be  the  major  driving  force  of  species 

the 

evolution. Their most representative is the PLCH (P-Ioop 
containing  hydrolase:  c.37.1  in  SCOP)  domain  family, 
found  at numerous important protein  interactions in  the 
widest  range  of  species  known  (hence,  perhaps  the 
oldest and most important protein fold). The second most 
prominent  family  is  the  immunoglobin  family  that  has 
prospered  since  the  appearance  of eukaryotes.  While 
PLCH  domains  are  found 
important 
functions, 
including  energy  metabolism  and  many 
enzymatic functions,  immunoglobin famlies occur more 
in  structural  functions.  A different niche or territory was 
occupied by the two different structures. 

in  almost  all 

2. 7.  The  age  of  protein  folds  and  biological  species 
measured by comparative interactomics: Measuring the 
age  of any  particular  species  is  more  a  philosophical 
than  a  biological  problem.  All  genomes  have  a 
complication  in  their genome  origin  due to  horizontally 
transferred  genes,  deletions,  and  insertions  that  mask 

170  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 167-173, December2004 

their lineage. Calculating the precise age of any species 
is  theoretically  impossible.  Practically,  there  are  no 
fossils  that  can  reveal  the  exact  age  of any  microbial 
organisms  that  lived  billions  years  ago  (Schof,  1993). 
However,  it is possible to measure the relative antiquity 
of  species  by  measuring  the  relative  age  of  protein 
families.  In the past,  protein sequence alignments were 
used  to  estimate  the  rough  date  of the  divergence  of 
species  (Doolittle  et  a/.,  1996).  However,  using  an 
individual protein's divergence is not sufficiently precise. 
Using protein structural domains and families is a more 
reliable  method.  Protein  domains  and  families  have  a 
proportionally  linear  relationship  with  the  evolution  of 
cells  and  species.  Their  rate  of evolution  is  strikingly 
constant.  However,  the  repertoire  of  protein  families 
alone cannot explain the diversity of life forms. One can 
compare  small  RNA  molecules  to  derive  evolutionary 
distances  among  species.  However,  organisms  have 
systems  level  differences  in  their  morphology  (for 
example, large multicellular organism versus microscopic 
monocellular organisms) and mode of life. Therefore, the 
best  approach  presently  available  is  to  compare  their 
interactomes.  lnteractomes can reflect the complexity of 
the organisms. To answer a simple question of how one 
species differs from another, the difference of interaction 
networks  of  all  the  molecules  can  be  an  answer. 
Measuring the age of protein families can be done by the 
occurrences of proteins  in  presently known  organisms. 
Proteins  that  are  found  in  many  species  will  have  a 
greater chance  of being  older than  others  (Bolser and 
Park, 2003). 

2.8.  Evolution  of  interaction  netv..orks:  Analyzing  the 
pairs and networks in evolution is not easy, as there is a 
limited  amount  of  molecular  interaction  information  at 
present.  Also,  there  are  multiple  layers  of interaction. 
Protein  domain-domain  is  a  fairly  distinct  layer  of 
molecular interaction. It is particularly useful to study the 
long evolution of protein structures. Protein-protein layer 
interaction  that  is  one  level  higher  than  domain  is 
important in  real-time  cellular processes.  Furthermore, 
most  proteins  function  within  or  in  association  with 
protein complexes that are at another layer of molecular 
interaction.  Describing  such  multi-scale  molecular 
interaction is not straightforward (Moon eta/., 2005). An 
attempt has been  made to map protein domain-domain 
interactions  on  a  global  scale  from  a  30  structural 
database  (Park  et  a/.,  2001)  which  could  map  the 
interaction of structural  groups or protein families.  One 
can  analyze the evolution of interaction networks using 
the  bioinformatic  homology  assignment  of  various 
genomes (Lappe eta/., 2001; Bolser eta/., 2003;  Kim et 

a/.,  2004}.  Computationally,  by using  the fused  gene,  it 
information,  it is possible to detect the domain-domain I 
interaction (Marcotte eta/.,  1999;  Enright eta/.,  1999). 
On  the experimental  side,  large scale yeast two hybrid 
analysis  enabled  interactomes  of  several  genomes. 
These approaches use full protein-protein interaction (Ito 
eta/., 2001;  Uetz eta/., 2000).  The advantage of using 
these  approaches  is  that the  information  reflects  each 
species' molecular interaction as a complex network, as 
long as the experimental technique (Raicu eta/., 2004) is 
reliable.  Yeast  two  hybrid  experiment  resembles  a 
snapshot  of the  interactomes  along  evolutionary  time. 
Recently, more research results have been accumulated 
on protein domain (fold) structure interactions (Chia and 
Kolatkar, 2004) 

from 

the 

researchers 

2.9.  lnteractomes  and  interaction  maps:  The  term 
interactome  has  been  used  independently  by  several 
bioinformatics 
late  1990's 
(http://interactome.org).  Around  the  same  time,  on  the 
experimental  side,  very  large  scale  yeast  two  hybrid 
system data became available for yeast and C.  elegans 
(Walhout  et  a/.,  2000).  Now,  the  list  includes  the  fly 
interactome (Sanchez eta/., 1999). Recently, there have 
been  comparative  studies  of 
large  scale 
interactomes.  Using  the  available  experimental  data, 
other  groups  started  to  predict  the  interactions  of 
proteins  using  probabilistic  models  and 
interaction 
matrices.  Although  there  is  the  important  problem  of 
obtaining  experimental  verification  for  such  predictive 
methods, they can dramatically extend the scope of data 
in the interactome field. 

these 

2.1 0. Many interactomes:  Now the field is moving into a 
new era where people are constructing the whole human 
interactome (http://hpid.org; Kim eta/., 2003; Lehner and 
Fraser, 2004). The species specific interactome concept 
is not new. Other interactomes, such as the mitochondrial, 
have been  built;  it was estimated that there are around 
1500 protein domains in mitochondria. The rice genome 
(Oryza  sativa)  has  shown  1441  protein  family-family 
interactions from the 32% assignment rate of proteins to 
all 
the  predicted  and  known  gene  sequences 
(http://oryzasativa.org). Lately, the scope of interactomes 
has gone toward disease specific proteome such as the 
down syndrome interactome (Gardiner eta/., 2004). 

2.11.  lnterfaceome: the puzzle pieces of interaction: As 
one  can  describe  protein  folding  as  the  interaction 
network of small  molecules  such  as  amino  acids,  the 
protein interactome can be subdivided into many pieces 
of interfaces.  Mapping  all  such  small  pieces  leads  to 

its  interface.  For  example, 

the 

therefore,  unlike  protein  sequences, 

structure  based 
computational  drug  discovery. 
Interfaces  are  the  bolts  and  nuts  of  the  evolution,  if 
interaction  is  the  atom  of evolution  as  a  concept  and 
principle. 
Interfaces  do  not  contain  any  order 
information, 
it 
requires a different representation  method. A traditional 
way to do this is to represent them as 3D coordinates that 
can be grouped and belonged to a protein domain. This 
enables  a  hierarchy  from  the  highest  possible  protein 
structure  to 
in  SCOP 
hierarchy,  interface X can be classified as C.371.1.1.X. 
It  belongs  to  the  SCOP  class  C  and  superfamily  37, 
family  1 ,  domain  1 ,  and 
interface  X.  The 
consequence  is  that  we  can  map  all  such  structural 
interfaces  into  an  organized  network  or  map  called 
lnterfaceome  (http://interfaceome.org). There has been 
much  research  on  individual  and  groups  of  interfaces 
(Chothia and Janin, 1975; Lawrence and Colman,  1993; 
Jones and  Thornton,  1997;  Jones and Thornton,  1997; 
Jones eta/.,  2000).  lnterfaceome aims to cover all  the 
interfaces in a network with a clear hierarchy that can be 
represented in many different ways such as in a Voronoi 
diagram  (Richards,  197 4;  Richards,  1977;  Poupon, 
2004).  Protein  interfaces  can  be  detected  by  simple 
distance measurement (PSIMAP) and accessible surface 
area (ASA,  Chothia,  1976, Miller eta/.,  1987).  lnterPare 
is  a  database  server 
interfaceome 
information (http:/ /i nterpare. net). 

that  provides 

3.  Network Biology 
3.1.  NebM>rk  evolution:  The  term  network  evolution 
indicates that the agent of evolution is the network rather 
than  individual  components  of  the  network  such  as 
proteins and genes related to aging process (Promislow, 
2004).  It  has  been  found  that  interaction  networks, 
perhaps  all  biological  networks,  are  very  conservative 
and  tight  in  evolution  (most  important  biochemical 
pathways and regulation networks are shared by species 
in different superkingdoms).  New molecular interactions 

a) 

b) 

Angstrom Distance 

Fig.  3.  Determining  interaction.  a)  Simple distance  measure 
(for  example,  5  angstrom  5  contacts)  among  proteins  or 
protein domains. b) Accessible surface area (ASA) method for 
determining the interfaces. Delta ASA is the difference of ASA 
between bound and unbound forms of proteins. 

The Atom of Evolution  171 

are carefully chosen,  and  perhaps the core interactome 
has not changed  since the very beginning of life.  Netv.ork 
biology (http://netv.orkbiology.org) is a new discipline where 
biological  research  is  carried  out with  networks  as  the 
central  perspective  (Jeong  et  a/.,  2001;  Albert  and 
Barabasi, 2002; Albert and  Othmer,  2003;  Ng  and Tan, 
2004). Essentially, all biological entities (bio-entities) are 
analyzed  as  networks  with  their  modular  components 
(Gagneur eta/.,  2004).  With  this  new perspective,  the 
most  critical  aspect  of  biological  problems 
is  the 
information process capability and information processing 
architecture  as  represented  in  networks.  One  of  the 
outcomes  of  network biology  is  the  calculability  of the 
complexity  of  life.  Complexity  is  a  measure  of  the 
concentration  of  information,  and  life  can  only  be 
completely  analyzed  by  mapping  the  architecture  of 
complexity. 

3.2.  NebM>rk  visualization:  One  of  the  first  steps  of 
analyzing  complexity  is  representing  data  with  visual 
tools  such  as  Pajek  (Batagelj  and  Mrvar,  2001 ), 
InterViewer (Ju eta/., 2003), ProViz (lragne eta/., 2004), 
and PING (Hongchao eta/., 2004). 

Conclusion 
Modern  biology is  becoming an  information science as 
contemporary  biological  problems  are  associated  with 
networks, circuits, controls, and molecular evolution. An 
interaction  pair as  the  most fundamental  evolution  unit 
has  been  introduced  for  mapping  interactomes  and 
biological  networks.  The  ultimate  understanding  of life 
will be achieved through understanding the complexity of 
such interaction networks at two very different domains: 
a long evolution interaction process and a short period of 
cellular interaction processes. Recent efforts on mapping 
the interactions of biological information objects, such as 
interactome  map,  interfaceome  map,  network  biology 
approach, and various servers associated with them, are 
introduced. Complete computational simulation of life by 
human beings will be achieved in the next few decades. 
However complex this will be and whatever experimental 
techniques will be necessary for us to reach that stage of 
evolution,  it  is  necessary  to  map  and  interpret  the 
interactions of molecules, especially proteins. 

Acknowlegements 
Jong Bhak is supported by IMT2000 C3-4 grant of ministry 
of information and communication of Korea and Biogreen21. 
JB  thanks  Andreas  Heger,  Liisa  Holm,  Matthieu  Louis, 
Sabine Dietmann,  Nabil Ali,  Richard  Harrington,  Michael 

172  Genomics & Informatics  Vol. 2(4) 167-173, December2004 

Lappe,  Michael  Schroeder,  Panos  Dafas,  KyungSook 
Han,  DongHoon  Oh,  HyunSuk  Park,  SangSoo  Kim, 
Namcheol  Kim,  HyoGyum  Kim,  WanGyu  Kim,  Tim 
Hubbard,  Cyrus  Chothia,  Sarah  Teichmann,  and  other 
colleagues. We thank many scientists and engineers who 
enjoy what they  do with  curiosity,  enthusiasm,  fun  and 
love  as they are the  people who make this world  more 
understandable and appreciable. 

References 

Albert,  R.,  Jeong,  H.,  and  Barabasi, A.L.  (2000).  Error and 
attack tolerance of complex networks.  Nature  406, 378-
382. 

Albert,  R.  and  Othmer,  H.G.,  (2003).  The  topology  of the 
regulat- ory 
the  expression 
pattern  of the  seg- ment  polarity genes  in Drosophila 
melanogaster. J. Theor.  Bioi.  223,  1-18. 

interactions  predicts 

Albert,  R.  and  Baraba'si,  A-L.  (2002). statistical  mechanics 

of complex networks.  Rev.  Mod.  Phys.  74,47-97. 

Batagelj,  V.  and  Mrvar,  A.  (2001 ).  Pajek-analysis  and 

visualization of large networks.  LNCS 2265, 477-478. 

Bolser,  D.M.  and  Park,  J.  (2003).  Biological  Network 
Evolution  Hypothesis  Applied  to  Protein  Structural 
lnteractome.  Genomics & Informatics 7-19. 

Bolser,  D.,  Panos,  D,  Harrington,  R.,  Park,  J.,  and 
Schroeder,  M., 
(2003).  Visualisation  and  Graph(cid:173)
theoretic  Analysis  of  a  Large-scale  Protein  Structural 
lnteractome., BMC Bioinformatics 445,  1471-2105 

Bray,  D.  (1995).  Protein  molecules  as  computational 

elements in living cells.  Nature 376,  307-312. 

Caffrey, D.R., Samaroo, S., Hughes, J.D., Mintseris, J., and 
Huang,  E.S.  (2004). Are protein-protein interfaces more 
conserved  in  sequence  than  the  rest  of  the  protein 
surface? Protein Science 13,  190-202. 

Chia,  J.M,  and  Kolatkar,  P.R.  (2004).  Implications  for 
domain 
interactions  based  on 
structuralio  information.  BMC  Bioinformatics  26,  161 
[Epub ahead of print] 

fusn  protein-protein 

Chothia, C. and Jan in, J. ( 1975). Principles of protein-protein 

recognition.  Nature 256,  705-708. 

Chothia, C. ( 1976). The nature of the accessible and buried 

surfaces in proteins. J.Moi.Biol.  105, 1-14. 

Darwin,  C.  (1859).  On  the  origins  of  species,  London, 
http:llpages.britishlibrary.netlcharles.darwinltexts!origin 
1859/origin _fm. html 

Doolittle, R.F., Feng, D.F., Tsang, S., Cho, G., and Little, E., 
(1_996).  Determining  Divergence  Times  of  the  Major 
K1ngdoms  of  Living  Organisms  with  a  Protein  Clock. 
Science 271, 47G-477. 

Enright,  A.J.,  lliopoulos,  1.,  Kyrpides,  N.C.,  and  Ouzounis, 
C.A.  ( 1999).  Protein  interaction  maps  for  complete 

genomes based on gene fusion events. Nature 402, 86-
90. 

Ito,  T.,  Chiba,  T.,  Ozawa,  R.,  Yoshida,  M.,  Hattori, M.,  and 
Sakaki, Y.  (2001 ). A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis 
to explore the yeast protein  interactome,  Y.  Proc.  Nat/. 
Acad.  Sci.  USA 98,  4569-4574.  Epub. 

Jones,  S.  and  Thornton,  J.M. 

(1997).  Analysis  of 
Protein-protein  interaction  sites  using  surface  patches. 
J.  Mol.  Bioi.  272,  121-132. 

Jones,  S.  and  Thornton,  J.M.  (1997).  Principle of protein(cid:173)
protein interactions. Proc. Nat/. Acad. Sci. USA 93,  13-20. 
Jones,  S.,  Marin,  A.,  and  Thornton,  J.M.  (2000).  Protein 
domain interfaces: characterization and comparison with 
oligomeric  protein  interfaces.  Protein  Engineering  13, 
77-82. 

Ju, B.H., Park, B., ParkJ.H., and HanK. (2003). Visualization 
and  analysis  of protein  interactions.  Bioinformatics  19 
317-318. 
' 
Gagneur,  J,  Krause,  R.,  Bouwmeester,  T.,  and  Casari,  G. 
(2004 ).  Modular  decomposition  of  protein-protein 
interaction networks. Genome Bioi. 5,  R57.  Epub. 

Gardiner,  K.,  Davisson  M.T.,  and  Crnic,  L.S.  (2004). 
Building protein interaction maps for Down's syndrome. 
Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 3,  142-156. 

Lu,  H., Zhu, X., Liu, H., Skogem, G., Zang, L., Zang, Y., Cai, 
L., Zhao, Y., Sun, S., Xu, J., Bu, D., and Chen, R. (2004). 
The  interactome  as  a tree-an attempt to visualize the 
protein-protein  interaction  network  in  yeast.  Nucleic 
Acids Research 32, 4804-4811. 

lragne, F., Nikolski, M., Mathieu, B., Auber, D., and Sherman 
D.  (2004).  ProViz:  Protein  Interaction  Visualization  and 
Exploration. Bioinforrnatics [Epub ahead of print] 

Jeong,  H.,  Mason,  S.P.,  Barabasi,  A:L.,  and  Oltvai,  Z.N. 
(2001 ).  Lethality  and  centrality  in  protein  networks. 
Nature  411,41-42. 

Kim, W., Bolser, D.M., and Park, J.,  (2004). Large scale co(cid:173)
evolution analysis of Protein Structurallnterlogues using 
the  global  Protein  Structural 
lnteractome  Map 
(PSIMAP). Bioinformatics 20,  1138-1150. 

Kim,  H.,  Park,  J.,  and  Han,  K,  (2003).  Predicting  Protein 
Interactions  in  Human  by  Homologous  Interactions  in 
Yeast.  Lecture Notes in  Computer Science 2637,  159-
165. 

Lappe,  M.,  Park,  J.,  Niggemann,  0., and  Holm,  L.  (2001). 
Generating  protein  interaction  maps  from  incomplete 
data:  application  to  Fold  assignment.  Bioinforrnatics 
Vol.17 Suppl.1, S149-S156. 

Lehner, B. and Fraser, F.  (2004). A first-draft human protein(cid:173)
interaction~- Genorre B'dogy5:R63 doi:10.118QI gb-2004-
5-9-r63. 

Lawrence,  M.C.  and  Colman,  P.M. 

(1993).  Shape 
complementarity  at  protein/protein  interfaces.  J.  Mol. 

Bioi. 234,  946-950. 

Marcotte, E.M., Pellegrini, M., Ng, H.L., Rice, D.W., Yeates, 
T.O.,  and  Eisenberg,  D.  (1999).  Detecting  protein 
function  and  protein-protein  interactions  from  genome 
sequences.  Science 285, 751-753. 

Miller,  S.,  Janin,  J.,  Lesk,  A.M.,  and  Chotia,  C.  (1987). 
Interior and surface of monomeric proteins. J.  Mol.  Bioi. 
196, 641-656. 

Moon,  H.S.,  Bhak,  J.,  Lee,  K.H.,  and  Lee,  D.  (2005). 
Architecture  of  Basic  Building  Blocks  in  Protein  and 
Domain  Structural  Interaction  Networks.  Bioinformatics 
(in press). 

Ng,  S.K.  and Tan,  S.H.  (2004).  Discovering protein-protein 

interactions. J.  Bioinform Comput.  Bioi.  1,  711-741. 

Park,  J.,  Dietmann,  S.,  Heger,  A.,  and  Holm,  L.  (2000). 
Estimating the significance of sequence order in protein 
secondary structure prediction. Bioinformatics 16, 978-987. 
Park,  J.  and  Bolser,  D.,  (2001).  Conservation  of  protein 
interaction network in evolution. Genome Informatics 12, 
135-140. 

Park, J.,  Lappe,  M.,  and Teichmann, S.A.  (2001).  Mapping 
protein 
intramolecular  and 
intermolecular protein family interaction repertoires in the 
PDB and yeast.  J.  Mol.  Bioi.  30,  307,  929-938. 

interactions: 

family 

Poupon,  A. 

(2004).  Voronoi  and  Voronoi-related 
in  studies  of  protein  structure  and 

tessellations 
interaction.  Curr.  Opio.  Stru.  Bioi.  14,  1-9. 

Promislow,  D.E.  (2004).  Protein  networks,  pleiotropy  and 
the evolution of senescence. Proc. R.  Soc.  Land. B.  Bioi. 
Sci.  271,  1225-1234. 

Raicu V., Jansma D. B., Miller R.J., and Friesen J.D. (2004). 
in  vivo  by  spectrally 

interaction  quantified 

Protein 

The Atom of Evolution  173 

resolved 
Biochem J.  Sep ?;Pt.  [Epub ahead  of print] 

resonance  energy 

fluorescence 

transfer. 

Richard,  F.M. 

(1974).  The 

interpretation  of  protein 
structures: total volume, group volume distributions and 
packing density. J.  Mol.  Bioi.  82,  1-14. 

Richards,  F.M.  (1977). Area, volumes,  packing and  protein 

structures, Ann.  Rev.  Biophys.  Bioeng.  6,  151-176. 

Varshney  A.,  Brooks,  F.,  and  Richardson,  D.  (1995). 
Defining, Computing, and Visualizing Molecular Interfaces. 
Proceedings IEEE Visualization 95,  36-43 

Sanchez, C., Lachaize, C., Janody, F., Bellon, B., Roder, L., 
Euzenat,  J.,  Rechenmann,  F.,  and  Jacq,  B.  (1999). 
Grasping at molecular interactions and genetic networks 
in  Drosophila  melanogaster using  FlyNets,  an  Internet 
database.  Nucleic Acids Res. 27,  89-94. 

Schof, J.W.  (1993). Microfossils of the Early Archean Apex 
Chert: New Evidence of the Antiquity of life. Science 260, 
64G-646. 

Searls,  D.B.  (1993).  The  Computational  Linguistics  of 
Biological  Sequences. 
In  Artificial  Intelligence  and 
Molecular Biology, L.  Hunter, ed. (AAAI Press) pp.47-120. 
Uetz, P., Giot, L.,  Cagney, G., Mansfield, T.A., Judson, RS., 
Knight,  J.R.,  Lockshon,  D.,  Narayan,  V.,  Srinivasan,  M., 
Pochart,  P.,  Qureshi-Emili,  A.,  Li,  Y.,  Godwin,  B., 
Conover,  D.,  Kalbfleisch,  T.,  Vijayadamodar,  G.,  Yang, 
M., Johnston, M.,  Fields,  S., and Rothberg,  J.M.  (2000). 
A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Nature 403, 623--627. 

Walhout, A.J., Boulton, S.J., and Vidal, M. (2000). Yeast two 
-hybrid systems and protein interaction mapping projects 
for yeast and worm.  Yeast 17, 88-94. 

