Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  57-63,  June  2008

Development  of  KHapmap  Browser  using  DAS  for  Korean 
HapMap  Research

Hoon  Jin1,  Seung-Ho  Kim2,  Young  Uk  Kim1, 
Young-Kyu  Park1,  Mihyun  Ji1  and  Young  Joo 
Kim1*

1Medical  Genomics  Research  Center, 
Analysis  Laboratory,  KRIBB,  Daejeon  305-806,  Korea

2Instrumental 

Abstract

The  Korean  HapMap  Project  has  been  carried  out  for 
the  last  5  years  since  it  started  in  June,  2003.  The  proj-
ect  generated  data  for  a  sum  of  1,764,000  Korean  SNPs 
and  formally  registered  the  data  to  the  dbSNP  of  NCBI 
(The dbSNP website. 2008).  We  have  developed  a  ser-
ies  of  software  programs  for  association  studies  as  well 
as  for  the  comparison  and  analysis  of  Korean  HapMap 
data  with  four  other  populations  (CEPH,  Yoruba,  Han 
Chinese,  and  Japanese  populations).  The  KHapmap 
Browser  was  developed  and  integrated  to  provide  hap-
lotype  retrieval  and  comparative  study  tools  of  human 
ethnicities  for  comprehensive  disease  association  stud-
ies  (http://www.khapmap.org).  On  that  basis,  GBrowse 
was  adopted  in  the  KHapmap  Browser  for  inherent 
Korean  genetic  data,  and  a  provision  of  extended  serv-
ices  was  pledged  with  the  distributed  sequence  annota-
tion  system  (DAS).  The  dynamic  linking  service  of  the 
KHapmap  Browser  to  other  tools  in  our  intranetwork  en-
vironment  provides  many  enhanced 
functions  over 
GBrowse  without  DAS.  KHapmap  Browser  is  expected 
to  be  an  invaluable  tool  for  the  study  of  Korean  and  in-
ternational  Hapmap  data.

Keywords: Korean,  SNP,  browser,  DAS,  Hapmap,  asso-
ciation

Introduction

Single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  are  the  most 
abundant  form  of  human  genetic  variation  and  are  a  re-
source  for  mapping  complex  genetic  traits.  A  genome  is 
covered  by  millions  of  these  markers,  and  researchers 
are  able  to  compare  which  SNPs  predominate  in  people 
who  have  a  certain  disease.  The  International  HapMap 
Project,  launched  in  October,  2002,  motivated  us  to 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  yjkim8@kribb.re.kr
Tel  +82-42-879-8127,  Fax  +82-42-879-8119
Accepted  10  June  2008

start  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  in  order  to  support 
Korean  HapMap  infrastructure  development  and  to  ac-
celerate  the  finding  of  genes  that  affect  health,  disease, 
and  individual  responses  to  medications  and  environ-
mental  factors  (The  International  HapMap  Consortium. 
2007).  In  the  International  HapMap  Project,  various 
types  of  genetic  data  are  being  gathered  and  analyzed 
from  four  populations  (CEPH,  Yoruba,  Han  Chinese,  and 
Japanese  populations).  The  International  HapMap  Pro-
ject  developed  haplotype  maps  that  describe  what  these 
variants  are,  where  they  occur  in  the  genome,  and  how 
they  are  distributed  among  the  persons  within.  A  Korean 
SNP  and  haplotype  database  system  was  developed 
through  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  to  provide  Korean 
researchers  with  useful  data-mining  information  about 
disease-associated  biomarkers  for  studies  of  complex 
diseases,  such  as  diabetes,  cancer,  and  stroke.  As  a 
partial  result  of  this  project,  we  generated  and  regis-
tered  data  for  1,764,000  Korean  SNPs  to  the  dbSNP  of 
NCBI  (dbSNP website. 2008). 
    The  KHapmap  Browser  that  is  based  on  the  generic 
genome  browser  (GBrowse)  provides  haplotype  retrieval 
and  comparative  study  tools  of  human  ethnicities  for 
comprehensive  disease  association  studies  (Stein et al., 
2002).  GBrowse  is  a  combination  of  databases  and  in-
teractive  web  pages  for  manipulating  and  displaying  an-
notations  on  genomes.  In  other  words,  GBrowse  is  a 
web-based  application  tool  that  is  developed  for  navi-
gating  and  visualizing  the  genomic  features  and  annota-
tions  interactively  for  users.  Through  it,  users  can  view 
a  certain  region  of  the  desired  genomes  and  search  for 
genetic  biomarkers.  They  may  conduct  a  full-text  search 
for  most  features  of  the  genomes.  They  also  can  down-
load  SNP  assay,  genotype,  and  allele  frequency  in-
formation  and  generate  customized  sets  of  tag-SNPs  for 
(Thorisson  et  al.,  2005). 
their  association  studies 
GBrowse  utilizes  a  web-based  display  that  can  be  used 
to  show  arbitrary  features  of  a  nucleotide  or  protein  se-
quence  and  can  accommodate  genome-scale  se-
quences  that  are  megabases  in  length.  The  GBrowse 
system  consists  of  various  kinds  of  software  modules 
and  systems,  such  as  web  servers,  database  systems, 
and  Perl  libraries. 
    At  present,  many  biological  websites  that  provide  ge-
nomic  variants  or  portal  services  have  been  developed 
using  GBrowse,  including  the  following:  the  UCSC 
Genome  Browser  (Kuhn  et al.,  2007),  the  International 
HapMap  Project  (Thorisson et al.,  2005),  PlasmoDB  (The 

58    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  57-63,  June  2008

ApiDB/EuPathDB Project Team. 2008),  WormBase  (The 
WormBase  website.  2008), 
the  Perlegen  Genotype 
Browser  (The Perlegen Sciences. 2008),  the  Database  of 
Genome  Variants  (The  Department  of  Genetics  and 
Genomic Biology. 2008),  and  the  Database  of  Drosophi-
la  Genes  &  Genomes  (The FlyBase website. 2008).
    Users  can  describe  their  annotations  by  translating 
them  to  two  types  of  file  formats  in  GBrowse.  The  first 
file  format  is  a  GFF  (GBrowse  file  format)  format  that  is 
designed  to  be  a  light  and  easy  way  of  describing  most 
genomic  annotations  that  range  from  simple  one-ele-
ment  features  to  complex,  multipart  features,  such  as 
operons  and  their  regulatory  and  structural  elements 
(Stein et al,.  2008).  The  main  limitation  of  the  Bio::DB:: 
GFF  schema  is  that  it  relies  on  a  flat  coordinate  system 
to  represent  genomic  features  and  can  handle  only 
one-level  nesting  of  sequence  features  (Stein  et al., 
2002).  The  other  is  the  GadFly  file  format.  It  was  de-
signed  to  be  capable  of  representing  multiple  levels  of 
part-subpart  relationships  and  takes  advantage  of  con-
trolled  vocabularies  to  describe  feature  types  and  gene 
functions  as  a  solution  for  the  limitations  of  GFF 
(Mungall et al.,  2002).  Because  of  the  simplicity  and  fast 
speed  that  are  used  to  treat  GBrowse,  GFF  tends  to  be 
used  more  often.  The  GFF  format  is  a  flat  tab-delimited 
file  (Stein  et al.,  2008),  and  a  series  of  individual  data 
is  written  by  lines.  One  line  contains  nine  tab-limited  at-
tributes;  i.e.,  seqid,  source,  type,  start  position,  end  po-
sition,  score,  strand,  phase,  and  group.  If  users  want  to 
show 
their  genetic  variants  or  annotations  using 
GBrowse,  one  must  provide  newly  generated  data  in 
GFF  format  to  GBrowse.
    Currently,  one  of  the  major  tasks  of  systems  biology 
is  integrating  as  much  experimental  and  computational 
information  as  possible  and  thereby  gaining  biological 
insight  into  the  properties  and  function  of  the  macro-
molecules  that  are  under  observation  (Olason  et al., 
2005).  DAS  is  one  of  the  systems  that  support  a  dis-
tributed  client-server  network  protocol.  It  allows  se-
quence  annotations  to  be  decentralized  among  multiple 
third-party  annotators  and  integrated  on  an  as-needed 
basis  by  client-side  software  (Robin  et al.,  2001).  DAS 
clients  make  requests  by  fetching  a  defined  URL  from 
a  DAS  server  and  accordingly  receive  simple  XML  re-

sponses  using  HTTP  (Prlić et al.,  2007).  DAS-mediated 

data  exchange  and  visualization  is  heavily  used  in  popu-
lar  genome  browsers  like  Ensembl  (Hubbard  et al., 
2007),  Wormbase  (Stein  et al.,  2000),  and  GBrowse 
(Stein  et al.,  2002).
    Another  choice  of  support  is  the  web  service  that  is 
based  on  Service  Oriented  Architecture  (SOA).  SOA  is 
composed  of  three  components:  service  provider,  con-
sumer  (service  requestor),  and  service  registry.  BioMOBY 

is  an  open  source  research  project  that  aims  to  generate 
an  architecture  for  the  discovery  and  distribution  of  bio-
logical  data  through  web  services  (Mark  et al.,  2002). 
BioMOBY  is  not  supported  by  many  groups  yet.
    The  KHapmap  Browser,  based  on  GBrowse,  provides 
haplotype  retrieval  and  comparative  study  tools  of  hu-
man  ethnicities  for  comprehensive  disease  association 
studies.  In  order  to  provide  user-friendly  Korean  genetic 
data  manipulation  and  a  provision  of  extended  services, 
we  developed  the  KHapmap  Browser  and  show  several 
cases  using  the  DAS  system.

Methods

Architecture  and  Services

There  are  five  components  in  constructing  the  KHapmap 
Browser  system  (Fig.  1).  The  system  uses  Apache  web 
server,  GBrowse,  two  MySQL  database  systems,  and 
DAS  as  the  main  modules.  As  middlewares,  the  Perl 
and  Bioperl  modules  have  important  roles  in  operating 
GBrowse.  Then  the  KHapmap  Browser  was  operated 
based  on  GBrowse  and  DAS.  We  developed  the 
KHapmap  Browser  on  a  Linux  machine  (kernel  release 
2.6.9∼67.0.7.ELsmp)  that  had  Intel  dual  quad  process-
ors,  16  GB  of  memory,  and  software  (Apache  2.0.48, 
MySQL  5.0.45,  Bioperl  1.52,  GBrowse  1.68,  Perl  5.8.8 
and  Biodas  1.07).
    In  order  to  install  the  GBrowse  system,  a  web  server 
and  a  database  system  were  needed  as  minimal  system 
requirements.  We  used  two  independent  database  sys-
tems  for  faster  service.  In  other  words,  two  databases 
were  located  physically  in  separated  nodes  on  the  net-
work,  so  that  Korean  hapmap  data  could  be  searched 
at  higher  speeds.  Another  important  component  of  the 
KHapmap  Browser  was  the  DAS  module.  Through  DAS, 
remote  resources,  such  as  the  UCSC  genome  database, 
the  Ensembl  genome  database,  and  the  Perlegen  geno-
type  database,  could  be  embedded  into  the  KHapmap 
Browser  system  with  ease.

Fig.  1.  Architectural  flowchart  of  the  KHapmap  Browser 
system.  The  system  comprises  five  components  that  use 
Apache  web  server,  GBrowse,  two  MySQL  database  sys-
tems,  and  DAS  as  the  main  modules.

Development  of  KHapmap  Browser  using  DAS    59

    The  KHapmap  Browser  was  equipped  with  two  serv-
ices,  the  first  one  being  a  Korean  hapmap  data  brows-
ing  service  and  the  second  being  a  mirror  service  of  the 
International  HapMap  browser.  In  the  Korean  hapmap 
data  browsing  service,  we  showed  the  results  of  geno-
typed  Korean  SNPs  that  were  produced  by  the  Korean 
HapMap  Project  and  also  various  types  of  analyzed  da-
ta  compared  with  the  International  HapMap  Project  (Lee 
et al.,  2008). 

could  utilize  the  already  developed  tools  of  the  Interna-
tional  HapMap  browser  by  linking.  Our  trials  to  extend 
the  KHapmap  Browser  include:  1.  Embedding  the  UCSC 
Genome  databases  to  our  mirror  service;  2.  Embedding 
our  mirror  service  to  the  Korean  hapmap  data  browsing 
service;  and  3.  Dynamic  linking  of  the  KHapmap  Brower 
to  other 
the  Functional 
Element  SNPs  Database,  which  categorizes  functional 
elements  in  human  genic  regions.

this  case,  FESD, 

tools-in 

DAS  to  KHapmap  Browser

Preparation  of  Korean  HapMap  Data

While  there  are  many  kinds  of  web  database  systems 
that  are  equipped  with  GBrowse,  only  a  few  systems 
support  the  DAS  system-for  example,  the  International 
HapMap  browser  and  the  UCSC  Genome  Browser.  We 
embedded  DAS  to  the  KHapmap  Browser  so  that  it 

In  order  to  utilize  GBrowse,  most  of  the  hapmap  results 
were  converted  into  GFF  format  except  for  the  genotype 
data.  At  present,  the  International  HapMap  browser  pro-
vides  36  data  attributes  through  nine  tracks.  We  re-
moved  some  auxiliary  attributes  to  visualize  hapmap  re-

(A)

(B)

Fig.  2.  A  mirror  service  of  the  In-
ternational  HapMap  Browser  (http://
www.khapmap.org/).  (A)  A  graph-
ical  view  of  SNP  allele  frequency, 
(B)  Linkage  disequilibrium  (LD)  plots
of  four  populations  (European  (CEU),
Chinese 
(JPT), 
and  African  (YRI)  populations).

(CHB),  Japanese 

60    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  57-63,  June  2008

sults  in  four  data  attributes  for  four  populations;  i.e., 
genotyped  SNPs,  LD  plot,  Phased  Haplotype  Display, 
and  CNV-related  genomic  variants  and  deletions.  The 
UCSC  Genome  Browser  provides  over  100  data  attrib-
utes  through  12  tracks  for  humans,  and  we  selected  five 
hapmap-related  attributes:  HapMap  SNPs,  HapMap  LD 
Phased,  Tajima's  D  SNPs,  copy  number  variations 
(CNVs),  and  ENCODE  Regions.  Considering  these,  we 
selected  a  total  of  seven  attributes  for  the  KHapmap 
Brower,  which  were  CNVs,  genotyped  SNPs,  average  of 
10  kb  D'  and  R2  values  (Reich et al.,  2001),  LD  blocks 
by  the  Gabriel  method  (Gabriel  et  al.,  2002),  nine 
ENCODE  regions  (The  ENCODE  Project  Consortium, 
2007),  and  LD  plots  (Barrett  et al.,  2005). 
    To  calculate  Korean  CNV  data,  we  manipulated  the 
segment  files  of  90  individual  samples  from  500-kb 
Affymetrix  chips  and  computed  CNVs  by  using  the 
Redon et al.  2006  method  (Redon et al.,  2006).  D'  value 
means  the  difference  between  the  observed  frequencies 

and  the  expected  frequencies  of  two  loci.  In  this  paper, 
we  defined  the  D'  value  as  the  average  value  of  20-kb 
moving  windows.  The  R2  value  was  calculated  by  divid-
ing  the  D2  value  by  four  types  of  allele  frequencies  at 
two 
running 
Haploview  (Barrett et al.,  2005).  All  of  the  data  that  were 
calculated  were  programmed  by  using  the  Perl  language 
and  were  converted  to  the  GFF  format.

loci.  LD  blocks  were  generated  by 

Results

The  KHapmap  Browser  system  comprises  five  compo-
nents,  which  use  Apache  web  server,  GBrowse,  two 
MySQL  database  systems,  and  DAS  as  the  main 
modules.  Two,  physically  separated,  MySQL  database 
systems  were  adopted  to  deal  with  those  complex  and 
huge  data  of  linkage  disequilibrium  (LD)  and  other  anno-
tated  results.  The  KHapmap  Browser  can  be  accessed 
freely  at  http://www.khapmap.org/.

results  of 

Fig.  3.  Search 
the 
KHapmap  Browser.  A  graphical 
view  of  Korean  (KOR)  SNP  allele 
frequency  and  features  such  as 
copy  number  variation  (CNV),  D' 
value,  R2  value,  and  LD  patterns 
are  shown  for  Koreans.

    To  service  the  International  HapMap  Browser  as  a 
mirror  service,  International  HapMap  data  (NCBI  build 
36)  were  downloaded  from  the  designated  site  (http:// 
www.hapmap.org/downloads/gbrowse/latest/).  By  using 
a  script  that  was  provided  for  data  input  from  the  URL, 
all  of  the  GFF  files  were  generated  and  stored  into  the 
generic  KHapmap  Browse  database.  A  graphical  view  of 
SNP  allele  frequency  for  the  four  populations  (European 
(CEU),  Chinese  (CHB),  Japanese  (JPT),  and  African  (YRI) 
populations)  is  shown  in  Fig.  2A.  LD  is  known  to  occur 
in  a  block-like  structure  across  the  genome,  whereby 
conserved  haplotype  blocks  of  tens  to  hundreds  of  kilo-
bases  are  punctuated  by  "hot  spots"  of  recombination 
(Daly  et al,.  2001).  LD  plots  that  were  drawn  for  the 
same  locus  also  are  shown  (Fig.  2B).
    To  service  those  users  who  are  interested  in  only 
Korean  haplotype  data,  we  constructed  a  Korean 
HapMap  data  browsing  service.  A  graphical  view  of 
Korean  SNP  allele  frequency  and  features,  such  as  copy 
number  variation  (CNV),  D'  value,  R2  value,  and  LD  pat-
terns,  clearly  were  shown  for  Koreans  (Fig.  3). 
    To  utilize  other  Genome  browser  services,  the  local 
Korean  Browser  was  extended  to  remote  resources,  in 
this  case,  the  UCSC  Genome  browser  by  DAS  (Fig.  4). 
Through  this  process,  we  give  researchers  an  integrated 
service 
the  KHapmap 

for  SNP-related  studies. 

In 

Development  of  KHapmap  Browser  using  DAS    61

Browser  service,  users  also  can  see  the  compared  re-
sults  between  Korean  and  other  populations  by  using 
DAS  (Fig.  5). 
    We  integrated  the  KHapmap  Browser  with  the  FESD 
system,  the  Functional  Element  SNPs  Database,  which 
categorizes  functional  elements  in  human  genic  regions 
(Kang et al.,  2005;  Kim et al.,  2007)  (Fig.  6).  The  figure 
shows  that  the  results  of  FESD  may  be  more  powerful 
and  graphically  more  dynamic  by  linkage  to  the  KHap-
map  Browser.

Discussion

results  of 

The  KHapmap  Browser  has  been  developed  as  one  of 
the 
the  Korean  HapMap  Project.  The 
KHapmap  Browser  utilized  GBrowse  and  DAS  in  order 
to  bring  about  three  differences  compared  with  the 
International  HapMap  Browser.  First,  we  made  Korean 
hapmap  data  from  the  genotyped  SNPs  and  processed 
them  so  that  users  could  analyze  the  data  better  and 
powerfully.  For  these  purposes,  we  decided  what  in-
formation  should  be  selected  and  made  for  the  study  of 
Korean  genetic  variants  as  compared  with  the  interna-
tional  hapmap  samples.  Second,  the  KHapmap  Browser 
provides  two  independent  services:  one  is  a  mirror  serv-
ice  of  the  International  HapMap  browser  (Fig.  2)  and  the 

Fig.  4.  Track  information  of  the 
extended  mirror  service  by  DAS 
using  the  UCSC  Genome  browser 
(HG18).

Fig.  5.  Imported  DAS  tracks  of 
the  Korean  HapMap  data  brows-
ing  service  from  the  UCSC  Geno-
me  browser.

62    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  6(2)  57-63,  June  2008

Fig.  6.  An  application  of 
the 
KHapmap  Browser  to  FESD,  the 
Functional  Element  SNPs  Data-
base,  which  categorizes  functional 
elements  in  human  genic  regions.

other  is  the  Korean  HapMap  data  browsing  service  (Fig. 
3).  Also,  the  services  were  embedded  together  for  com-
plementary  uses  by  DAS.  Third,  through  the  dynamic 
link  to  other  tools,  we  may  provide  more  powerful  and 
valuable  results,  as  shown  in  Fig.  6.  Any  remote  bio-
logical  resources  that  support  DAS  also  can  be  em-
bedded  for  extended  services.  The  dynamic  linking  serv-
ice  of  the  KHapmap  Browser  to  other  tools  in  our  intra-
network  environment  provides  many  enhanced  functions 
over  GBrowse  without  DAS.  The  KHapmap  Browser  is 
expected  to  be  an  invaluable  tool  for  the  study  of 
Korean  and  International  Hapmap  data  (Lee et al.,  2008).

Acknowledgments

The  authors  thank  Aravinda  Chakravarti,  Peter  Chen, 
and  Carl  Kashuk  at  McKusick-Nathans  Institute  of 
Genetic  Medicine  at  Johns  Hopkins  University  for  val-
uable  advice  and  comments  on  the  manuscript.  The  au-
thors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  partial  financial  support 
of  the  Korean  HapMap  Project  of  the  Ministry  of 
Education,  Science  and  Technology  (MEST),  and  the 
Sasang  Constitution  SNP  Database  Project  of  Korea 
Research  Council  of  Fundamental  Science  &  Techno-
logy.

Conclusion

During  the  Korean  HapMap  Project,  we  generated  data 
for  a  total  number  of  1,764,000  Korean  SNPs  and  for-
mally  registered  them  to  the  dbSNP.  The  KHapmap 
Browser  was  developed  and  integrated  to  provide  hap-
lotype  retrieval  and  comparative  study  tools  of  human 
ethnicities  for  comprehensive  disease  association  stu-
dies.  Based  on  GBrowse,  the  KHapmap  Browser  utilized 
DAS  in  order  to  provide  both  powerful  views  of  inherent 
Korean  genetic  data  and  a  provision  for  extended 
services.  A  dynamic  linking  service  of  the  KHapmap 
Browser  to  other  tools  in  our  intranetwork  environment 
may  be  profitable  and  flexible  because  it  can  extend  the 
originally  limited  functions  of  the  tools.  The  KHapmap 
Browser  is  expected  to  be  an  invaluable  tool  for  the 
study  of  Korean  and  International  Hapmap  data.

References

Abecasis,  G.R.,  Noguchi,  E.,  Heinzmann,  A.,  Traherne,  J.A., 
Bhattacharyya,  S., et al.  (2001).  Extent  and  distribution  of 
linkage  disequilibrium  in  three  genome  regions.  Am. J. 
Hum. Genet. 68,  191-197.

Barrett,  J.C.,  Fry,  B.,  Maller,  J.,  and  Daly,  M.J.  (2005). 
Haploview:  analysis  and  visualization  of  LD  and  hap-
lotype  maps.  Bioinformatics 21,  263-265.

Berners-Lee,  T.,  Hendler,  J.,  and  Lassila,  O.  (2001).  The 

Semantic  Web.  Scientific  American  Magazine.

Mungall,  C.J.,  Misra,  S.,  Berman,  B.P.,  Carlson,  J.,  Frise, 
E.,  Harris,  N.,  Marshall,  B.,  Shu,  S.,  Kaminker,  J.S., 
Prochnik,  S.E.,  Smith,  C.D.,  Smith,  E.,  Tupy,  J.L.,  Wiel, 
C.,  Rubin,  G.M.,  and  Lewis,  S.E.  (2002).  An  integrated 
computational  pipeline  and  database 
support 
whole-genome  sequence  annotation.  Genome Biology 3, 
research0081.1-0081.11

to 

Daly,  M.J.,  Rioux,  J.D.,  Schaffner,  S.F.,  Hudson,  T.J.,  and 

Lander,  E.S.  (2001).  High  resolution  haplotype  structure 
in  the  human  genome.  Nat. Genet. 29,  229-232.

Dowell,  R.D.,  Jokerst,  R.M.,  Day,  A.,  Eddy,  S.R.,  and  Stein, 
L.  (2001).  The  distributed  annotation  system. BMC Bioin-
formatics 2,  7.

Gabriel,  S.B.,  Schaffner,  S.F.,  Nguyen,  H.,  Moore,  J.M., 
Roy,  J.,  Blumenstiel,  B.,  Higgins,  J.,  De-Felice,  M., 
Lochner,  A.,  Faggart,  M.,  Liu-Cordero,  S.N.,  Rotimi,  C., 
Adeyemo,  A.,  Cooper,  R.,  Ward,  R.,  Lander,  E.S.,  Daly, 
M.J.,  and  Altshuler,  D.  (2002).  The  structure  of  haplotype 
blocks  in  the  human  genome.  Science 296,  2225-2229.

Kang,  H.,  Choi,  K.O.,  Kim,  B.D.,  Kim,  S.,  and  Kim,  Y.J. 
(2005).  FESD:  a  functional  element  SNPs  database  in 
human.  Nucleic Acids Res. 33,  D518-D522.

Kim,  H.J.,  Kim,  I.H.,  Shin,  K.H.,  Park,  Y.K.,  Kang,  H.,  and 
Kim,  Y.J.  (2007).  FESD  II:  a  revised  functional  element 
SNP  database  of  human  ethnicities.  Genomics  & 
Informatics 5,  188-193.

Kuhn,  R.M.,  Karolchik,  D.,  Zweig,  A.S.,  Trumbower,  H., 
Thomas,  D.J.,  Thakkapallayil,  A.,  Sugnet,  C.W.,  Stanke, 
M.,  Smith,  K.E.,  Siepel,  A.,  Rosenbloom,  K.R.,  Rhead,  B., 
Raney,  B.J.,  Pohl,  A.,  Pedersen,  J.S.,  Hsu,  F.,  Hinrichs, 
A.S.,  Harte,  R.A.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Clawson,  H.,  Bejerano, 
G.,  Barber,  G.P.,  Baertsch,  R.,  Haussler,  D.,  and  Kent, 
W.J.  (2007).  The  UCSC  genome  browser  database:  up-
date  2007.  Nucleic Acids Res. 35,  D668-673.

Lee,  J.E.,  Jang,  H.Y.,  Kim,  S.,  Yoo,  Y.K.,  Hwang,  J.J.,  Jun, 
H.J.,  Lee,  K.,  Son,  O.,  Yang,  J.M.,  Ahn,  K.S.,  Kim,  E., 
Lee,  H.W.,  Song,  K.,  Kim,  H.L.,  Lee,  S.G.,  Yoon,  Y., 
Kimm,  K.,  Han,  B.G.,  Oh,  B.,  Kim,  C.B.,  Jin,  H.,  Choi, 
K.O.,  Kang,  H.,  and  Kim,  Y.J.  (2008).  Chromosome  22 
LD  map  comparison  between  Korean  and  other 
populations.  Genomics & Informatics 6,  18-28.

Olason,  P.I.  (2005).  Integrating  protein  annotation  resources 
through  the  Distributed  Annotation  System. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 33,  W468-470.

Prlić,  A.,  Down,  T.A.,  Kulesha,  E.,  Finn,  R.D.,  Kahari,  A., 

and  Hubbard,  T.J.  (2007).  Integrating  sequence  and 
structural  biology  with  DAS.  BMC Bioinformatics 8,  333. 
Redon,  R.,  Ishikawa,  S.,  Fitch,  K.R.,  Feuk,  L.,  Perry,  G.H., 
Andrews,  T.D.,  Fiegler,  H.,  et al.  (2006).  Global  variation 

Development  of  KHapmap  Browser  using  DAS    63

in  copy  number  in  the  human  genome.  Nature  444, 
444-454

Reich,  D.E.,  Cargill,  M.,  Bolk,  S.,  Ireland,  J.,  Sabeti,  P.C., 
Richter,  D.J.,  Lavery,  T.,  Kouyoumjian,  R.,  Farhadian, 
S.F.,  Ward,  R.,  and  Lander,  E.S.  (2001).  Linkage  dis-
equilibrium  in  the  human  genome.  Nature 411,  199-204.
Stein,  L.D.,  Mungall,  C.,  Shu,  S.,  Caudy,  M.,  Mangone,  M., 
Day,  A.,  Nickerson,  E.,  Stajich,  J.E.,  Harris,  T.W.,  Arva, 
A.,  and  Lewis,  S.  (2002).  The  generic  genome  browser:  a 
building  block  for  a  model  organism  system  database. 
Genome Res. 12,  1599-1610.

Stein,  L.,  Sternberg,  P.,  Durbin,  R.,  Thierry-Mieg,  J.,  and 
Spieth,  J.  (2000).  WormBase:  network  access  to  the  ge-
nome  and  biology  of  Caenorhabditis  elegans.  Nucleic 
Acids Res. 28,  82-86.

Stein,  L.D.,  and  the  GMOD  development  team.  (2008). 

GBrowse  Configuration  HOWTO.

Subramaniam,  S.  (1998).  The  Biology  Workbench--a  seam-
less  database  and  analysis  environment  for  the  biologist. 
Proteins 32,  1-2.

Thorisson,  G.A.,  Smith,  A.V.,  Krishnan,  L.,  and  Stein,  L.D. 
International  HapMap  Project  Web  site. 

(2005).  The 
Genome Research 15,  1591-1593.

The  dbSNP  web  site.  (2008).  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 

projects/SNP.

The  International  HapMap  web  site.  (2008).  http://www. 

hapmap.org.

The  International  HapMap  Consortium.  (2007).  A  second 
generation  human  haplotype  map  of  over  3.1  million 
SNPs.  Nature 449,  851-861.

The  ApiDB/EuPathDB  Project  Team.  (2008).  The  PlasmoDB 

web  site.  http://www.plasmodb.org/plasmo.

The  Department  of  Genetics  and  Genomic  Biology.  (2008). 

http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/cgi-bin/gbrowse/hg18.

The  ENCODE  Project  Consortium.  (2007).  Identification  and 
analysis  of  functional  elements  in  1%  of  the  human  ge-
nome  by  the  ENCODE  pilot  project. Nature 447,  799-816.

The  FlyBase  web  site.  (2008).  http://flybase.net.
The  Perlegen  Sciences.  (2008). http://genome.perlegen.com/ 

browser/index_v2.html.

The  WormBase  web  site.  (2008).  http://www.wormbase.org.

