APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  163-167,  September  2009

The  Korean  Pharmacogenomic  Database  at  NIFDS:  2008 
Update

T.S.  Kang1,  S.W.  Woo2,  H.J.  Park1,  S.Y.  Han1, 
M.H.  Park1  and  M.W.  Chung1*

1Clinical  Research  Division,  Toxicological  Evaluation  and 
Research  Department,  Korea  Food  and  Drug  Admini-
stration,  Seoul  122-704,  Korea,  2Pharmaceutical  Mana-
gement  Division,  Korea  Food  and  Drug  Administration, 
Seoul  122-704,  Korea

Abstract

Since  its  first  release  in  2007,  the  National  Institute  of 
Food  and  Drug  Safety  Evaluation  (NIFDS)  has  provided 
pharmacogenomic  and  comparative  information  specific 
to  Koreans  to  allow  regulatory  reviewers  and  resear-
chers  to  adapt  their  working  practices  to  pharmacoge-
nomics.  The  highlights  of  this  year’s  additions  include 
"Drug  Information",  "Gene  Information"  and  "Pharmaco-
genomic  information  in  the  drug  labels"  sections.  These 
new  additions  provide  information  on  737  genes,  719 
drugs  and  pharmacogenomic  data  of  the  labels  or  rela-
bels  of  253  approved  drugs  as  of  November  2008.  The 
latest  version  of  the  Korean  Pharmacogenomic  Data-
base  (KPD,  release  2.0)  has  expanded  significantly  since 
its  previous  release.  More  SNP  and  haplotype  in-
formation  has  been  added  to  the  database  with  the  lat-
est  version  of  the  KPD  containing  approximately  four 
times  as  many  SNPs  and  haplotypes  than  the  previous 
version  (719  vs.  152,  and  30  vs.  7  respectively).  Through 
the  "SNP"  and  "Haplotype"  sections,  the  KPD  provides 
unique  Korean  SNP  and  haplotype  information  as  well 
as  comparative  information  of  other  populations  (Japa-
nese,  Chinese,  European,  African)  to  offer  a  range  of 
pharmacogenomic  data  that  can  help  reviewers  and  the 
public  understand  pharmacogenomic  information.  The 
quality  and  quantity  of  information  in  the  KPD  has  also 
been  improved  considerably.  This  data  can  be  found  at: 
http://www.nitr.go.kr/nitr/contents/m134700/view.do/.

Keywords:  database,  Korean  people,  pharmacogeno-
mics

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  mwchung@kfda.go.kr
Tel  +82-2-380-1807,  Fax  +82-2-388-6458
Accepted  24  July  2009

Introduction

required  data 

from 

this 

information 

The  Internet  is  an  ideal  platform  for  storing,  providing 
and  exchanging  large-scale  genetic  information,  and 
there  are  a  large  number  of  web-based  bioinformatics 
sites  worldwide.  These  databases  are  operated  by  many 
organizations  for  a  variety  of  purposes,  and  offer  huge 
volumes  of  information  online  for  public  access  (Chang 
Kug  Kim  2009;  Hongseok  Tae  2009;  Innocenti  2005; 
Werner  Kalow  2002).
    The  most  well-known  pharmacogenomic  information 
database  is  the  Pharmacogenetics  and  Pharmacogeno-
mics  Knowledge  Base  (PharmGKB,  www.pharmGKB. 
org),  which  is  the  most  comprehensive  pharmacoge-
nomic  information  database  in  the  world.  The  Pharm-
GKB  provides  information  on  genotypes,  molecular  and 
functional  assays,  pharmacodynamics,  pharmacokine-
tics,  and  clinical  outcomes  to  those  involved  in  pharma-
cogenomic  research  (Innocenti  2005). 
    However,  this  database  contains  a  wide  range  of  in-
formation,  and  beginners  can  find  it  difficult  to  obtain 
the 
labyrinth. 
First-time  visiting  researchers  find  it  extremely  difficult  to 
locate  the  desired  information  on  the  PharmGKB.  There 
are  no  databases  that  provide  unique  Korean  infor-
mation  on  the  SNP  and  Haplotypes  in  drug-metabo-
lism-related  genes.  In  addition,  there  is  no  information 
on  the  relationships  between  particular  SNPs  and  the 
drug  metabolism,  which  can  be  used  to  identify  candi-
date  genes  affecting  disease  progression  or  drug  reac-
tions.
    The  Korean  Pharmacogenomic  database  (KPD)  was 
developed  to  allow  easier  searches  for  Korean  Pharma-
cogenomic  information  (Tae  Sun  Kang et al.,  2008),  and 
is  located  at  the  National  Institute  of  Food  and  Drug 
Safety  Evaluation  (NIFDS)  homepage.  When  the  KPD 
was  first  released  in  2007,  it  offered  the  selected  and 
specialized  data  (mainly  SNP  and  haplotype  information 
in 
trasporters  and  re-
ceptors).  For  the  convenience  of  the  public,  researchers 
and  scientific  reviewer,  link  functions  to  major  interma-
tional  databases 
(NCBI,  dbSNP  database,  and 
PharmGKB)  were  established  in  the  KPD.
    Since  its  first  release,  the  KPD  has  been  used  in  a 
wide  range  of  applications  including  drug  evaluations, 
selection  of  SNPs  in  Koreans  and  general  pharmacoge-
nomic  education.  The  KPD  is  being  updated  con-

liver  metabolizing  enzymes, 

164    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  163-167,  September  2009

tinuously  to  provide  more  practical  pharmacogenomic 
information  for  drug  evaluations.  This  paper  reports 
these  developments  as  well  as  the  many  additions  and 
improvements  appearing  in  the  latest  version  of  the  KPD 
(release  2.0)

Methods

Database  Organization

Oracle  10g  was  used  for  database  management  system 
and  the  interface  between  database  and  web  was  im-
plemented  on  JAVA/JSP.  Details  related  to  the  genotype 
information, 
linkage  disequilibrium  blocks,  haplotype 
structures  and  database  organization  on  the  KPD  have 
been  described  previously  (Tae  Sun  Kang et al.,  2008). 

Drug  and  label  information

Drug  and  pharmacogenomic  information  in  drug  label 
were  obtained  from  the  Physician’s  Desk  Reference 
(2007)  for  the  U.S.A,  the  National  Health  Service  home-
page  (http://emc.medicines.org.uk/)  for  the  U.K,  Drugs  in 
Japan  (2007)  for  Japan  and  DIMS  and  EZDRUG  for 
Korea  respectively.

Quality  Assurance

For  completeness  of  the  database,  each  data  used  in 
the  KPD  is  entered  or  prepared  by  one  menber  of  the 
clinical  research  division  in  NIFDS  and  separately  vali-
dated  by  second  member  of  the  clinical  research 
division.  Additional  spot  checks  are  routinely  performed 
on  each  entry  by  senior  members  of  the  review  group, 
including  two  phamacists,  a  statistician  and  a  PhD-level 
genetist.

Results

The  KPD  was  developed  to  collect  genetic  information 
unique  to  the  Korean  population,  and  to  allow  easy  in-
formation  searches  within  the  numerous  databases 
available.  It  is  also  expected  to  act  as  a  bridge  that  fa-
cilitates  easier  information  gathering  through  links  to 
larger  databases  that  provide  more  precise  information. 
With  the  increasing  need  to  provide  more  practical  in-
formation  to  evaluate  drugs  as  well  as  educate  scientific 
reviewers  and  the  public,  three  new  data  field  additions 
have  been  added  and  database  size  and  coverage  has 
been  expanded.

Data  field  additions

As  shown  in  Table  1,  the  KPD  has  three  new  additions. 

Gene  Information  section
The  “Gene  information  section”  was  established  to  pro-
vide  information  on  genes,  such  as  those  encoding  the 
major  drug-metabolizing  enzymes,  transporters,  and  re-
ceptors,  which  can  affect  the  drug  response  (adverse 
effects  and  efficacy),  based  on  the  SNPs  provided  in 
the  "SNP  information"  section.  A  total  of  737  genes  are 
arranged  in  alphabetical  order  to  allow  easy  access,  and 
the  number  of  relevant  genes  is  recorded  next  to  each 
entry.  This  section  also  offers  detailed  information  on 
the  summary,  key  pathways,  drug  and  substrates,  im-
portant  variants  and  important  haplotypes  of  each  gene 
(Fig.  1).  For  those  who  require  more  specialized  in-
formation  on  each  gene,  quality  information  is  provided 
by  links  to  the  PharmGKB  database  (www.pharmGKB. 
org),  the  UCSC  Genome  Bioinformatics  (http://genome. 
ucsc.edu)  and  the  OMIM  at  NCBI  (http://www.ncbi.nlm. 
nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=omim)  sites.

Drug  Information  section
The  "Drug  Information"  section  was  established  to  pro-
vide  drug  information,  based  on  the  drugs  provided  in 
the  "Pharmacogenomic  Information  in  the  drug  labels" 
section.  A  total  of  592  drugs  have  been  arranged  in  al-
phabetical  order  to  allow  easy  access,  and  the  number 
of  relevant  drugs  is  recorded  next  to  each  entry.  This 
section  also  offers  detailed  information  on  the  molecular 
weight,  indications,  mechanisms  of  action,  absorption 
data,  distribution  data,  protein  binding  data,  bio-
transformation  data,  half  life,  elimination  data,  adverse 
effects  and  interactions  of  each  drug  (Fig.  1).  Those  re-
quiring  more  specialized  information  on  each  drug  can 
obtain  it  via  links  to  the  PharmGKB  database  (www. 
pharmGKB.org/)  site.

Pharmacogenomic  Information  in  the  drug  labels  section
The  "Pharmacogenomic  Information  in  the  drug  labels" 
section  was  established  to  provide  information  on  the 

Table  1.  Comparison  of  the  data  content  in  KPD  release 
1.0  with  that  in  KPD  release  2.0

Category

Release  1.0

Release  2.0

Gene  Information
Drug  Information
Pharmacogenomic  Information
  in  the  drug  labels 
SNP  Information
Haplotype  Information

    0  gene
    0  drug
    0  drug

737  genes
592  drugs
253  drugs

152  genes
    4  genes

719  genes
  10  genes

Korean  Pharmacogenomic  Database    165

( 

·® LJM@CI;qtc.:!.'fJ *OiJ llttf;Qtr•e , 

~ Alternate Names 

Alternate  S ymbol s 

ABC2Q:  AlP-BINDING  CASSETTE  SUBFAMILY B  MEMBER  1:  ABCBI:  CD243: 
DOXORUBICIN RESISTANCE; GP 170;  Homo sapiens ATP  binding cassene 
sub-family 8  (MORITAP>  member I  (A8CB1)  mRNA; P glycoorotein  1; P 
glycoprotein  1/multiple drug resistance  t; P-GLVCOPAOTEIN  I ; PGYI; P(cid:173)
gJycoprotein  J;  P-glvcoprotein-1/multlple  drug resistance-!; P-go;  colchicln 
sensitivity; doxorublcln resistance; multldrug resistance  I 
ABC2Q:  CD243:  CLCS: GP17!l:  MOAI: NM_!XlJ927.1: P-GP: P-gp; PGYI 

•  Introdu c tory  Inform ation 

•  Key  PubM e d  IDs 

- Key  Pathways 

•  D rugs/Subs trates 

•  Phenotypes/Disea ses 

•  lmoortant  V a riants 
ABCBI  1236C>T  ABCBI:2677G>NT  ABCBI:343SC>T 

•  lmoortant Haplotyoes 

•  Reference 

.. ~ .. 
"'"'"' 
~~~ 

~:il:~~(li\JJ!i!~*> 

Ill;;: label 

~;;:label 

1!:2 label 

;;:LH  label 

OMEPRAZOLE 
LOSEC 

J 

HI/I~~~ 
•iiJthough in normal subjects no intetaction with theophylline or propranolol wa 
s found. there have been clinical reports of interaction with other drugs metabol 
ized ..;a the cytochrome P450 system (eg. cyclosporine. disuHiram. benzodiaz 
epines).  Patients should be monhored to determine ij ~ is necessary to  adjust t 
he dosage of these drugs when taken concomitantly with PRILOSEC: 
Pharmacokinetic properties _Omeprazole is entirely metabolised mainly in the I 
iver 
27.1'= CYP450 2C I9(CYP2CI9) !f.'= 3A4(CYP3A4)~ Ol~llll . CYP2CI9 PM~ 
'il~'2!~ ~t'V ~i!!JII  '2!~01JIJd 13-20%. l!7fAI~JI '2!~01JIIJd 3-4%~ _5j_ 
.il:!. PM:!OIJd £HAl'= D!!! PPitim iilit 
~~or~ :2!1l11Jd  ~~ CYP2CI901  ~~~OlAf:! 

Fig. 1.  Screenshot  of  some  of  the  new  additions  to  the  KPD 
including  Gene  information,  Drug  information  and  Pharmaco-
genomic  information  in  drug  label.

Generic  name 
Trade name 

ABC 
Zlagen 

~ M o l ecul ar  weight 
670.76 daltons 

,  Indi cation s 

•  C ontraindlcation a 

,.  M ech anisms  Of  A c ti on 

,  Abs orption  Data 

•  Di stribution  Data 

•  Protein  Bindins  Data 

•  Biotran s formation  Data 

•  Elimination  Da ta 

..  Adverse 

ffec ts 

,  Interactions 

•  Refe re nce 

166    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  7(3)  163-167,  September  2009

use  of  pharmacogenomic  data  in  drug  labels  and  rela-
bels  in  Korea  and  foreign  countries.  A  total  of  253  ap-
proved  drugs  have  been  arranged  in  alphabetical  order 
to  allow  easy  access,  and  the  number  of  relevant  drugs 
is  recorded  next  to  each  entry.  This  section  allows  de-
tailed  use  of  the  pharmacogenomic  data  listed  in  the 
Physicians'  Desk  Reference.  Through  Valid  Biomarker 
(V.B.)  information,  pharmacogenomic  data  in  the  drug 
labels  and  relabels  in  Korea  can  be  compared  with 
those  of  other  regulations  (the  U.S.A,  the  U.K  and 
Japan)  (Fig.  1).

Expanded  database  size  and  coverage

the 

International  HapMap  database 

Table  1  shows  a  detailed  comparison  of  KPD  release 
1.0  with  KPD  release  2.0.  The  latest  release  of  the  KPD 
has  detailed  information  on  the  SNPs  of  a  total  of  719 
genes.  Comparisons  of  the  SNP  frequencies  in  the 
Korean  population  with  those  of  other  races  registered 
in 
(Europeans, 
Chinese,  Japanese,  and  African)  are  also  provided. 
    The  "haplotype  information"  section  has  been  also 
updated  to  provide  information  on  10  unique  Korean 
haplotypes.  Korean  linkage  disequilibrium  block  data  for 
the  genes  encoding  the  major  metabolic-enzymes  is 
included.  The  blocks  comprise  the  SNPs  with  minor  al-
lele  frequency  (MAF)  values  ＞5%  using  the  Gabriel 
method  in  the  Haploview  3.32  program  (Ardlie,  Kruglyak 
and  Seielstad  2002;  Barrett,  Fry,  Maller  and  Daly  2005). 
The  haplotype  frequencies  of  the  major  liver  metabol-
ic-enzymes  for  the  Korean  population  can  be  compared 
with  those  of  other  races  registered  in  the  International 
HapMap  (Europeans,  Chinese,  Japanese,  and  African). 
In  addition,  the  latest  version  contains  approximately 
four  times  as  much  pharmacogenomic  information  as 
the  previous  release  (30  versus  7)  through  the  "Pharma-
cogenomic  Information  and  Education"  facility  within  the 
KPD.

Discussion

NIFDS  has  been  operating  the  KPD  with  the  main  aim 
of  offering  users  a  “bridging”  function  to  simplify  the 
search  for  useful  information.  The  KPD  has  systemati-
cally  collected  and  maintained  unique  Korean  pharma-
cogenomic  information  from  literatures  and  other  data-
bases  and  provided  scientic  reviewers  and  researchers 
with  the  selected  data.  Since  its  first  release,  the  KPD 
has  provided  data  on  Korean  single-nucleotide  poly-
morphisms  (SNPs)  and  haplotypes.  It  also  allows  a 
comparison  of  the  Korean  SNP  and  haplotype  frequen-
cies  with  those  of  the  other  ethnic  groups  registered  in 
the  International  HapMap  (Thorisson,  Smith,  Krishnan 

and  Stein  2005).  The  KPD  is  focused  primarily  on  pro-
viding  the  detailed  pharmacogenomic  data  needed  to 
facilitate  drug  evaluation.  Therefore,  in  the  latest  version, 
three  new  additions  ("Gene  Information"  section,  "Drug 
Information"  section  and  "Pharmacogenomic  information 
in  the  drug  labels"  section)  were  established,  and  the 
data  coverage  and  database  linkages  were  expanded  to 
provide  more  practical  pharmacogenomic  information  for 
drug  evaluations.  These  new  additions  provide  scientific 
reviewers  and  the  general  public  with  the  concise  in-
formation  needed  to  understand  ethnic  differences  and 
evaluate  bridging  studies.  It  is  also  expected  to  be  use-
ful  for  finding  unique  Korean  Pharmacogenomic  data 
without  the  need  to  search  other  databases.  The  KPD 
contains  extensive  links  to  almost  all  major  bioinfor-
matics  and  pharmacogenomic  databases  (the  dbSNP 
and  OMIM  at  NCBI,  PharmGKB  and  UCSC  sites) 
(Karolchik  et al.,  2008;  Kuhn  et al.,  2007;  Kuhn  et al., 
2009;  Wheeler  et al.,  2008).  Through  these  links,  the 
KPD  provides  convenient  search  functions  to  obtain 
more  precise  information  with  just  a  single  mouse  click.
What  is  the  most  important  thing  is  to  update  the  data-
base  with  the  lastst  pharcogenomic  data  on  a  constant 
basis  in  order  to  maintain  the  KPD  effectively.  Local  ex-
pert  organizations  and  networks  are  needed  to  guaran-
tee  the  reliability  of  the  pharmacogenomic  information 
contained  in  the  database.  In  order  to  ensure  that  the 
KPD  is  used  effectively  by  scientific  reviewers  and  the 
general  public,  the  types  of  visitors  to  the  site  must  be 
assessed  and  the  database  must  be  upgraded  periodi-
cally  to  reflect  the  demands  of  the  major  visiting 
population.  Overall,  it  is  expected  that  the  KPD  will 
serve  as  a  useful  resource  to  both  scientific  reviewers 
and  the  general  public.

Acknowledgements

The  authors  wish  to  thank  the  ISTECH  INC.  and  Dr. 
Yang-Seok,  Kim  who  contributed  to  development  of  the 
KPD.  This  study  was  supported  by  grant  no.  08171-
KFDA504  from  the  Korea  Food  and  Drug  Administration.

References

Ardlie,  K.G.,  Kruglyak,  L.,  and  Seielstad,  M.  (2002).  Patterns 
of  linkage  disequilibrium  in  the  human  genome. Nat. Rev. 
Genet.  3,  299-309.

Barrett,  J.C.,  Fry,  B.,  Maller,  J.,  and  Daly,  M.J.  (2005). 
Haploview:  analysis  and  visualization  of  LD  and  hap-
lotype  maps.  Bioinformatics  21,  263-265.

Innocenti,  F.  (2005).  The  pharmacogenetics  and  pharmaco-

genomics  knowledge  base.  HUMANA  Press.

Karolchik,  D.,  Kuhn,  R.M.,  Baertsch,  R.,  Barber,  G.P., 
Clawson,  H.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Giardine,  B.,  Harte,  R.A., 

Korean  Pharmacogenomic  Database    167

Hinrichs,  A.S.,  Hsu,  F.,  Kober,  K.M.,  Miller,  W.,  Pedersen, 
J.S.,  Pohl,  A.,  Raney,  B.J.,  Rhead,  B.,  Rosenbloom,  K.R., 
Smith,  K.E.,  Stanke,  M.,  Thakkapallayil,  A.,  Trumbower, 
H.,  Wang,  T.,  Zweig,  A.S.,  Haussler,  D.,  and  Kent,  W.J. 
(2008).  The  UCSC  genome  browser  database:  2008 
update.  Nucl. Acids Res.  36,  D773-779.

Kim,  C.K.,  Jeon,  Y.A.,  Cho,  G.T.,  Kwon,  S.W.,  Kim,  Y.H., 
and  Hong,  S.B.  (2009).  An  intergrated  database  and  web 
for  microbial  resources  at  KACC.  Genomics 
service 
Inform.  7,  41-45.

Kuhn,  R.M.,  Karolchik,  D.,  Zweig,  A.S.,  Trumbower,  H., 
Thomas,  D.J.,  Thakkapallayil,  A.,  Sugnet,  C.W.,  Stanke, 
M.,  Smith,  K.E.,  Siepel,  A.,  Rosenbloom,  K.R.,  Rhead,  B., 
Raney,  B.J.,  Pohl,  A.,  Pedersen,  J.S.,  Hsu,  F.,  Hinrichs, 
A.S.,  Harte,  R.A.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Clawson,  H.,  Bejerano, 
G.,  Barber,  G.P.,  Baertsch,  R.,  Haussler,  D.,  and  Kent, 
W.J.  (2007).  The  UCSC  genome  browser  database:  up-
date  2007.  Nucl. Acids Res.  35,  D668-673.

Kuhn,  R.M.,  Karolchik,  D.,  Zweig,  A.S.,  Wang,  T.,  Smith, 
K.E.,  Rosenbloom,  K.R.,  Rhead,  B.,  Raney,  B.J.,  Pohl,  A., 
Pheasant,  M.,  Meyer,  L.,  Hsu,  F.,  Hinrichs,  A.S.,  Harte, 
R.A.,  Giardine,  B.,  Fujita,  P.,  Diekhans,  M.,  Dreszer,  T., 
Clawson,  H.,  Barber,  G.P.,  Haussler,  D.,  and  Kent,  W.J.   
(2009).  The  UCSC  genome  browser  database:  update 

2009.  Nucl. Acids Res.  37,  D755-761.

Tae  Sun  Kang,  S.W.W.,  Hyun  Joo  Park,  and  Jaesook  Roh. 
(2008).  Korean  pharmacogenomic  database:  pharmacoge-
nomic  haplotype  analysis  of  the  Korean  population  and 
ethnic  comparisons.  Biomol. Ther.  15,  77-81.

Tae,  H.,  Han,  J.M.,  Ahn,  B.Y.,  and  Park,  K.  (2009).  Bio-
store:  a  repository  system  for  registering  and  distributing 
public  biology  databases.  Genomics Inform.  7,  49-  51.

Thorisson,  G.A.,  Smith,  A.V.,  Krishnan,  L.,  and  Stein,  L.D. 
international  HapMap  project  web  site. 

(2005).  The 
Genome Res.  15,  1592-1593.

Werner  Kalow,  U.A.M.a.R.F.T.  (2002).  WWW  Bioinformatics 

Resources.  Taylor  &  Francis.

Wheeler,  D.L.,  Barrett,  T.,  Benson,  D.A.,  Bryant,  S.H., 
Canese,  K.,  Chetvernin,  V.,  Church,  D.M.,  Dicuccio,  M., 
Edgar,  R.,  Federhen,  S.,  Feolo,  M.,  Geer,  L.Y.,  Helmberg, 
W.,  Kapustin,  Y.,  Khovayko,  O.,  Landsman,  D.,  Lipman, 
D.J.,  Madden,  T.L.,  Maglott,  D.R.,  Miller,  V.,  Ostell,  J., 
Pruitt,  K.D.,  Schuler,  G.D.,  Shumway,  M.,  Sequeira,  E., 
Sherry,  S.T.,  Sirotkin,  K.,  Souvorov,  A.,  Starchenko,  G., 
Tatusov,  R.L.,  Tatusova,  T.A.,  Wagner,  L.,  and  Yaschen-
ko,  E.    (2008).  Database  resources  of  the  national  center 
for  biotechnology 
information.  Nucl.  Acids  Res.  36, 
D13-21.

