APPLICATION NOTE

Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(2)  97-99,  June  2010

A  Simple  GUI-based  Sequencing  Format  Conversion  Tool  for 
the  Three  NGS  Platforms

Arang  Rhie,  Sanduk  Yang,  Kyung-Eun  Lee, 
Chin  Ting  Thong  and  Hyun-Seok  Park*

Department  of  Computer  Science,  Ewha  Womans  Uni-
versity,  Seoul  120-750,  Korea

Abstract

To  allow  for  a  quick  conversion  of  the  proprietary  se-
quence  data  from  various  sequencing  platforms,  se-
quence  format  conversion  toolkits  are  required  that  can 
be  easily  integrated  into  workflow  systems.  In  this  re-
spect,  a  format  conversion  tool,  as  well  as  quality  con-
version  tool  would  be  the  minimum  requirements  to  in-
tegrate  reads  from  different  platforms.  We  have  devel-
oped  the  Pyrus  NGS  Sequencing  Format  Converter,  a 
simple  software  toolkit  which  allows  to  convert  three 
kinds  of  Next  Generation  Sequencing  reads,  into  com-
monly  used  fasta  or  fastq  formats.  The  converter  mod-
ules  are  all  implemented,  uniformly,  in  Java  GUI  mod-
ules  that  can  be  integrated  in  software  applications  for 
displaying  the  data  content  in  the  same  format.

Availability:  You  may  download  the  conversion  module 
from  Sourceforge.net 
(https://sourceforge.net/projects/ 
ngssequencealig/files/PyrusNGSSequencingFormatConverter. 
zip/download).

Keywords:  sequence  format  conversion,  next  generation 
sequencing

Introduction

Among  the  NGS  (Next  Generation  Sequencing)  tech-
nologies,  three  distinct  platforms  have  attained  wide  dif-
fusion  (Horner et al.,  2010;  Shendure  and  Ji,  2008):  the 
Roche  Genome  Sequencer  System  (Droege  and  Hill, 
Ⓡ
 
2008;  Rothberg  and  Leamon,  2008),  the  Illumina
Genome  Analyzer  (Bennett,  2004),  and  the  Applied 
Biosystems  SOLiDTM  System  (Pandey  et  al.,  2008; 
Porreca et al.,  2006).  However,  these  instrument  suppli-
ers  use  different  formats  for  organizing  the  reads  and 
assigning  quality  scores  (Cock  et al.,  2010).  Thus,  the 

*Corresponding  author:  E-mail  neo@ewha.ac.kr
Tel  +82-2-3277-2831,  Fax  +82-2-3277-2306
Accepted  17  June  2010

management  and  analysis  of  next-generation  sequenc-
ing  data  requires  the  development  of  format  conversion 
tools  to  integrate  huge  quantities  of  sequence  reads. 
The  three  instrument  suppliers  all  provide  their  own 
analysis  tools:  Illumina/Solexa  Genome  Analyzer  (http:// 
www.illumina.com/software.ilmn), Roche 454 (http://454.com/ 
products-solutions/analysis-tools/index.asp),  and  the  Solid 
(http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/)  software  development 
community.  Some  of  them  even  support  the  develop-
ment  of  open-source  bioinformatics  tools. 
    However,  there  are  few  open  source  systems  to  in-
tegrate  the  different  reads  from  the  same  samples.  On 
the  other  hand,  multiple  technical  platforms  or  different 
versions  of  the  same  platform  were  used  for  a  large- 
scale  sequencing  project,  in  many  studies  (MacLean et 
al.,  2009;  Miller et al.,  2010).  Thus,  it  became  necessary 
to  pool  information  across  these  multiple  sources  to  de-
rive  a  consensus  molecular  profile  for  each  sample. 
    Thus,  we  developed  the  Pyrus  Sequence  Format 
Converter,  written  in  Java.  The  format  conversion  tool 
allows  the  software  to  accept  sequence  read  files  from 
these  three  different  platforms. 

The  Pyrus  Sequence  Format  Convert-
sion  Tool

The  Pyrus  NGS  Sequence  Format  Converter  is  designed 
Ⓡ
  Genome 
to  read  sequence  data  from  the  Illumina
Analyzer,  the  Applied  Biosystems  SOLiDTM  System,  and 
the  Roche  Genome  Sequencer  System.  The  system 
converts  all  sequencing  reads  into  a  standard  fasta  or 
fastq  format.  Fig.  1  shows  the  Graphical  User  Interface 
of  the  system.  Users  can  select  the  file  format  of  their 
data,  upload  sample  files,  select  input  files  to  convert, 
and  click  Convert  to  begin  format  conversion.  The  direc-
tory  file  tree  shows  the  files  with  extension  of  fna,  fasta, 
csfasta,  fastq,  and  sff.  The  input  directory  tree  does  not 
show  .qual  files,  which  are  assumed  to  be  named  the 
same  as  the  corresponding  FASTA  formatted  file  so  that 
user  does  not  have  to  choose  the  coherent  .qual  file.  By 
pressing  the  Convert  button,  the  Format  Converter  auto-
matically  checks  with  input  file  extensions  and  pro-
ceeds,  once  the  file  and  formats  are  correctly  mapped. 
User  can  change  the  output  directory  by  pressing  the 
Change  button.

98    Genomics  &  Informatics    Vol.  8(2)  97-99,  June  2010

Fig.  1.  User  Interface  of  the  Pyrus  NGS  Sequence  Format 
Converter:  users  select  the  file  format  of  their  data,  upload
sample  files,  and  click  Change  to  begin  format  conversion.
File  format  “FASTQ  to  FASTA,  QUAL”  has  been  chosen  by
default.  For  SOLiDTM  System  reads,  the  csfasta  format  is 
used.  A  log  file  is  created  to  provide  a  summary  of  the 
process. 

Integrating  Quality  Values

Analogously  to  automated  Sanger  sequencing,  NGS 
platforms  provide  quality  scores  describing  the  correct-
ness  of  a  base  call.  NGS  platforms  have  different  error 
profiles  and,  thus,  quality  values  need  to  be  derived  ac-
cordingly  (Cock et al.,  2010;  Harismendy et al.,  2009).  In 
Ⓡ
  Genome  Analyzer,  and  the  454  Roche 
the  Illumina
Genome  Sequencer  System,  the  meaning  of  the  quality 
values  is  relatively  close  to  capillary  sequencers,  though 
the  range  of  Sanger  Phred  quality  scores  and  Illumina 
or  Roche  quality  scores  are  different.  In  the  SOLiDTM 
system,  quality  scores  are  assigned  to  each  color  and 
they  are  calculated  using  a  Phred-like  score. 
    Our  system  integrates  these  quality  values  from  differ-
ent  platform,  according  to  the  algorithms  described  in 
various  online  resources,  though  some  of  the  exact  rela-
tionship  between  NGS  scores  and  Phred  values  is  not 
completely  known,  yet.  For  an  up-to-date  discussion  on 
the  implications  of  quality  scores  for  the  NGS  platforms, 
there  exists  an  online  forum  (http://seqanswers.com). 
Fig.  2  shows  a  snapshot  after  converting  454  Roche 
GSFLX  .sff  file  into  a  regular  FASTA  and  Phred  quality 
valued  Qual  file. 

Fig.  2.  A  snapshot  after  converting  454  Roche  GSFLX  .sff
file  into  a  regular  FASTA  and  Phred  quality  valued  Qual  file.

Fig.  3.  Use  Case  Diagram  for  the  SMBA  Industrial-Educa-
tional  Cooperation  Project  (000358780109):  the  diagram  is 
created,  using  the  Visual  Paradigm  UML  Suite,  community 
edition  (http://www.visual-paradigm.com/).

format  converter,  with  graphical  user  interface.  This  is 
part  of  our  ongoing  effort  to  develop  a  large-scale  DNA 
comparative  alignment  LIMS  system  for  multiple  NGS 
sequencing  platforms,  as  in  Fig.  3.  The  Java-based  proj-
ect  is  supported  by  the  SMBA  Industrial-Educational 
Cooperation  Project 
the  Korean 
government.  Our  system 
in  pre-alpha 
release. 

(000358780109)  of 
is  currently 

Software  Release  Stage  and  Conclusion

References

Recently,  a  well  known  bioinformatics  integration  tool 
such  as  Galaxy  Tools  (Giardine  et al.,  2005)  begins  to 
add  new  libraries,  in  regards  to  NGS  data  processing. 
However,  the  core  component  and  operation  libraries 
are  written  in  C.  We  developed  a  Java-based  sequence 

Bennett,  S.  (2004).  Solexa  Ltd.  Pharmacogenomics  5:433- 

438.

Cock,  P.,  Fields,  C.,  Goto,  N.,  Heuer,  M.,  and  Rice,  P. 
(2010).  The  Sanger  FASTQ  file  format  for  sequences  with 
quality  scores,  and  the  Solexa/Illumina  FASTQ  variants, 
Nucl. Acids Res.  38,  1767-1771.

A  GUI-based  NGS  Sequencing  Format  Conversion  Tool    99

Droege,  M.,  and  Hill,  B.  (2008).  The  Genome  Sequencer 
FLX  System-longer  reads,  more  applications,  straight  for-
ward  bioinformatics  and  more  complete  data  sets.  J. 
Biotechnol.  136,  3-10.

Giardine,  B.,  Riemer,  C.,  Hardison,  R.C.,  Burhans,  R., 
Elnitski,  L.,  Shah,  P.,  Zhang,  Y.,  Blankenberg,  D.,  Albert, 
I.,  Taylor,  J.,  Miller,  W.,  Kent,  W.J.,  and  Nekrutenko,  A. 
(2005).  Galaxy:  a  platform  for  interactive  large-scale  ge-
nome  analysis.  Genome Res.  (10),  1451-1455.

Harismendy,  O.,  Ng,  P.C.,  Strausberg,  R.L.,  Wang,  X., 
Stockwell,  T.B.,  Beeson,  K.Y.,  Schork,  N.J.,  Murray,  S.S., 
Topol,  E.J.,  Levy,  S.,  and  Frazer,  K.A.  (2009).  Evaluation 
of  next  generation  sequencing  platforms  for  population 
targeted  sequencing  studies.  Genome Biol.  10,  R32.

Horner,  D.S.,  Pavesi,  G.,  Castrignanò,  T.,  De  Meo,  P.D., 

Liuni,  S.,  Sammeth,  M.,  Picardi,  E.,  and  Pesole,  G. 
(2010).  Bioinformatics  approaches  for  genomics  and  post 
genomics  applications  of  next-generation  sequencing. 
Brief. Bioinfo.  11,  181-197.

MacLean,  D.,  Jones  J.D.,  and  Studholme,  D.J.  (2009). 
Application  of  ‘next-generation’  sequencing  technologies 
to  microbial  genetics,  Nat. Rev. Microbiol.  7,  287-296.

Miller,  J.,  Koren,  S.,  and  Sutton,  G.  (2010).  Assembly  algo-
rithms  for  next-generation  sequencing  data,  Genomics 
95,  315-327.

Pandey,  V.,  Nutter,  R.C.,  and  E,  E.P.  (2008).  Applied 
Biosystems  SOLiD  system:  ligation-based  sequencing.  In 
Next Generation Genome Sequencing: towards personal-
ized medicine, Janitz,  M,  ed.  Weinheim,  Wiley-VCH,  pp. 
29-41.

Porreca,  G.J.,  Shendure,  J.,  and  Church,  G.M.  (2006). 
Polony  DNA  sequencing.  Curr ProtocMol. Biol.  Chapter 
7:Unit:7-8.

Rothberg,  J.M.,  and  Leamon,  J.H.  (2008).  The  development 
and  impact  of  454  sequencing.  Nat.  Biotechnol.  26, 
1117-1124.

Shendure,  J.,  and  Ji,  H.  (2008).  Next-generation  DNA 

sequencing.  Nat. Biotechnol.  26,  1135-1145.

