X-linked Gene Expression Profiles by RNAi-Mediated BRCA1 Knockdown in MCF7 Cells Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene confer an increased risk for breast and ovarian cancers. 

BRCA1 in female cells is directly related with the maintenance of the inactive X chromosome (Xi). 

The effect by the loss of the BRCA1 function on the X chromosome gene expression remains unclear in cancer cells. 

We attempted to investigate the expression pattern of the X-linked genes by performing BRCA1 knockdown via RNA interference in the MCF 7 breast cancer cell line. 

The transcriptional and translational levels of BRCA1 were decreased over 95% in the MCF 7 cells after BRCA1 knockdown. 

The expression patterns of one hundred ninety X-linked genes were profiled by the X chromosome-specific cDNA arrays. 

A total of seven percent of the X-linked genes (14/190) were aberrantly expressed by over 2-fold in the MCF7-BRCA1 knockdown cells, which contained two up-regulated genes (2/190, 1%) and 12 down- regulated genes (12/190, 6.3%). 

It is interesting that 72% of the aberrantly expressed X-linked genes were located on the Xq (10/14,) region. 

Our data suggests that BRCA1 may not be important to maintain X chromosome inactivation in cancer because the BRCA1 knockdown did increase the expression of the only one percent of X-linked genes in the human breast cancer cells.

Breast cancer is a complex disease and a variety of risk factors are involved in conjunction with the observed the BRCA1 germline mutations in familial breast cancer. 

Women with a mutation in one allele of the BRCA1 gene have higher rates of breast, ovarian and other cancers (Easton eta/., 1993). 

The hereditary breast cancers have a different gene expression pattern than do the sporadic cancers (Hedenfalk eta/., 2003).

BRCA1 has multiple functions for DNA repair, maintenance of genomic integrity, transcription regulation and cancer- suppression (Venkitaraman 2002). 

BRCA1 mutation can regulate the expression of the various genes such as oestrogen-receptor, ERBB2, p53 and cyclin D1 in familial cancer (Narod eta/., 2004). 

However, BRCA1 mediated transcriptional regulation is not well understood. 

The overexpression of BRCA1 induced the genes related with the DNA damage-response, the apoptotic pathway, the estrogen-response and the cytokine signal transduction pathway (Welcsh etal., 2002). 

The expression pattern of the downstream genes according to the loss of BRCA1 is not clear. 

BRCA1 may change the other gene expressions by direct or indirect protein interactions with RNA polymerase II, helicase A and etc. (Rosen eta/., 2003).

BRCA1 in female cells is directly related with the maintenance of the inactive X chromosome (Xi) (Ganesan et a/., 2004). 

BRCA1 may be related to the expression of the X chromosome genes. 

Xi-specific transcript (XIST) is located within the X-inactivation center (XIC) in the female somatic cells, and it plays a crucial role in Xi. 

Silencing of Xi is initiated at one location on the XIC. 

The coating of XIST on Xi is supported by BRCA1 because BRCA1 defect cancers show the Xi chromatin structural defects (Ganesan eta/., 2002). 

The role of BRCA1 as related with the XIST location in breast cancer suggests that the BRCA1 is a key point to maintain the Xi in breast cancer (Sirchia eta/., 2005). 

To study the differential expression pattern of X-linked genes in BRCA1-associated breast cancers, we attempted to investigate the change of expression of the 190 X-linked genes by inducing BRCA1 knockdown in a human breast cancer cell line having the wild type BRCA1, MCF7 by performing an X chromosome specific cDNA microarray. 

Microarray technology has been used for the analysis of genome-wide gene expression profiles, and it is a powerful tool for analyzing the variety genes expression of samples.

The mammalian expression vector, pSuper.retro.puro. (Oligoengine, Seattle, WA) was used for examining the expression of RNAi in MCF7 cells. 

The construct was generated by annealing the following complementary oligonucleotides. 

The synthesized oligonucleotides were forward, 5'-G ATC CCC GAA AGT ACG AGA TTT AGTCTT CAA GAG AGACTA AAT CTC GTACTTTCT I I I TGG AAA-3', and reverse, 5’-AG CTT TTC CAA AAA GAA AGT ACG AGA TTT AGT CTC TCT TG A AGA CTA AAT CTC GTA CTT TCG GG-3’, and they were inserted into the pSUPER vector at the Bgl n and HindlU sites (Fabbro etal., 2004)

Human breast cancer MCF7 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). 

Cells were grown in RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco BRL, Cergy Pontoise, France), and this was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin and 1% streptomycin. 

The cells were seeded onto 60 cm 2 dishes and then transfected at 70-80% confluence with 8 ug of plasmid DNA by using Lipofectamin 2000 reagent according to the manufacture’s instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A). 

The cells were analyzed at 72 h post­ transfection with performing puromycin selection.

The total RNA was isolated from the cultured cells with using QIAGEN RNA-Mini kits according to the manufacture’s instructions (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). 

All the RNA preparations were treated with DNase I (Roche, Boehringer-Mannhein, Germany). 

For the RNA analysis, equivalent amounts of total RNA served as the template for cDNA synthesis with using reverse-transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A). 

Real-time RT-PCR assays were carried out in a fluorometric thermal cycler (Rotor-Gene 2000, Corbett Research, Australia). 

For performing the quantitative real-time RT-PCR, SYBR-Green (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) was added to the reaction mixture, and the fluorescence was measured after each cycle. 

After the native cDNA copy number of each gene was calculated with using the comparative AACT method for each sample, the relative ratios of the tested gene for GAPDH were generated. 

The date is shown as the mean and standard deviation values of the three measurements per data point.

Whole-cell extracts were prepared from the cell lysates in a buffer that contained 50 mM Tris-HCI pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCI, 1% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM EDTA and 4 mg/ml of protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma, MO, USA). 

The samples were separated on 8% SDS polyacrylamide gels and then blotted onto PVDF membranes. 

The primary antibodies used were anti-BRCA1 (C-20, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 1:200) and anti-/?-actin (AC-15, Sigma, 1:5,000). 

After incubation with horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (anti-rabbit, Upstate, 1:1000 or anti-mouse, Calbiochem, 1:1000), the signals were detected by performing chemiluminescence with using ECL (Amersharm, Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ).

One-hundred ninety X-linked clones were provided by KRIBB (Korea Research Institute Bioscience and Biotechnology), and the clone information is listed in Table 1. 

Those clones were spotted in a X-linked cDNA microarray from Digital Genomics (Digital Genomics, Seoul, Korea). 

The RNA was prepared by using RiboAmp RNA amplification kits according to the manufacture’s instruction (Arcturus, Carlsbad, CA). 

Each 3 pg of aRNA (antisense RNA) was labeled with either Cy3-UTP or Cy5-UTP (NEN Life Science Products, Boston, MA, U.S.A.) during the reverse transcription (RT) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A). After hybridization, the slide was dried by centrifugation, and then it was scanned on a ScanArray 4000XL (Packard Bioscience, Billerica, MA, U.S.A.). 

The unified image was quantified with using ImaGene™ version 4.0 (BioDiscovery, Inc., Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A.). 

Data analysis were performed using the GeneSight™ 3.10 (BioDiscovery, Inc., Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A.).

We used RNAi for examining the gene expression change according to BRCA1 knockdown in the MCF7 cells. 

The RNAi was produced by employing the pSuper.retro.puro-vector system, which was indicated in the material and methods section (Fabbro et al., 2004). 

Successful use of this technology depends on effective mRNA degradation and the protein turnover. 

Bae et al reported the knockdown of BRCA1 by using the RNAi method in MCF7 cells (Bae et al., 2004). 

We used the same vector with identical sequences for the BRCA1 knockdown.

We assessed the silencing effect BRCA1-RNAi on its target mRNA by RT-PGR and Western blotting. 

Real-time RT-PCR data (Fig. 1a.) showed that BRCA1 mRNA level was markedly downregulated in MCF7 cells transfected with BRCA1-RNAi for 72 h. 

The Y axis indicates the expression level of BRCA1 mRNA that was normalized by using GAPDH. 

The data are presented as the mean ±SE of the individual values from three separate experiments. 

The knockdown level of the BRCA1 protein was also confirmed by western blot analysis (Fig. 1b). 

BRCA1 protein was not detected at 72 hrs after transfection. 

The 97% BRCA1 knockdown was shown at both the transcriptional and translational levels.

X-linked gene expression patterns by cDNA microarray We performed the cDNA microarray to identify the expression pattern of the X-linked genes according to BRCA1 knockdown. 

Our X-linked cDNA microarray contained 190 X-linked genes; the lists of genes are shown in Table 1. 

The total RNA was extracted from both BRCA1-RNAi and mock-transfected MCF7 cells. 

The probe was generated via RT-PCR from the BRCA1 -RNAi samples and the mock-transfected samples, respectively. We first compared the X-linked gene expression by performing BRCA1 knockdown. 

To verify the different incorporation rates of the Cy-3 and Cy-5 dye, we swapped the fluorescent dye (Fig. 2a). 

The schematic diagram for the change of the expression levels of the X-linked genes was according to the X chromosomal physical map (Fig. 2b). 

The overall differentially expressed genes between the BRCA1 -RNAi and the mock-transfected MCF7 cells were described according to the X chromosome loci (Fig. 2b). 

The Y axis represents the expression level (log 2 ratio>1, log 2 ratio>-1) in the BRCA1-RNAi transfected MCF7 cells. 

Similar results were shown by the three repeated experiments. 

A total of seven percent of the 190 X-linked genes (14/190) were differentially expressed, and 28% were at Xp and 72% were at Xq. 

Two genes (2/190,1%), RBMIOand VBP1, were up-regulated, and 12 genes (12/190, 6.3%), UBE1, OFD1, GYG2, NONO, TAF9L, TSPAN6, MCTS1, MTMR1, FAM3A, GDI1, CXorf40 and SLC10A4, were down-regulated by over 2-fold in the BRCA1-RNAi transfected MCF7 cells.

The genotypes of hereditary breast cancers are reflected in the different gene expression profiles (Rosen et al., 2003). However, the expression pattern of the X-linked genes is incompletely understood in BRCA1-related breast cancer. 

This study is the first data concerning the expression pattern of the X-linked genes after BRCA1 knockdown with using RNAi by performing DNA microarray experiments. 

After the BRCA1 knockdown, we experimented with the cDNA microarray to identify the expression pattern of the X-linked genes.

A new function for BRCA1 was reported in the heterochromatin formation, especially in the inactive X chromosome (Ganesan etal., 2002). 

However, it remains unclear whether BRCA1 modulates the expression of the X-linked genes to a global (affecting the entire X chromosome) or specific degree. 

Welcsh et al. have reported the upregulation of the XIST RNA levels, and this was followed by the BRCA1 expression (Welcsh et al., 2002). 

However, we found that the XIST expression was not changed by BRCA1 knockdown (data not shown), even though the XIST expression was low in the MCF7cells. 

Sudbral etal. employed Xchromosome-specific cDNA arrays to identify the genes that escaped from the X-inactivation (Sudbrak etal., 2001). 

We also employed X chromosome-specific cDNA arrays that spotted 190 X chromosome genes to identify the differentially expressed X-linked genes according to the BRCA1 knockdown (Jeong et al., 2004). 

However, almost all the X-linked genes were not changed by BRCA1 knockdown in the MCF7 cells.

Our data is the first to report the X-linked gene expression according to BRCA1 knockdown. 

We suggest that BRCA1 may not involve the X-linked gene expression, at least the MCF7 cancer cells. 

We supposed that both the X chromosomes of the MCF7 human breast carcinoma cell line may have active (Sirchia etal., 2005). 

Further investigations are needed to determine whether BRCA1 is related to Xi through such epigenetic mechanisms as chromatin modification.

