PromoterWizard: An Integrated Promoter Prediction Program Using Hybrid Methods.

 1 Promoter prediction is a very important problem and is closely related to the main problems of bioinformatics such as the construction of gene regulatory networks and gene function annotation.  In this context, we developed an integrated promoter prediction program using hybrid methods, PromoterWizard, which can be employed to detect the core promoter region and the transcription start site (TSS) in vertebrate genomic DNA sequences, an issue of obvious importance for genome annotation efforts.  PromoterWizard consists of three main modules and two auxiliary modules.  The three main modules include CDRM (Composite Dependency Reflecting Model) module, SVM (Support Vector Machine) module, and ICM (Interpolated Context Model) module.  The two auxiliary modules are CpG Island Detector and GCPlot that may contribute to improving the predictive accuracy of the three main modules and facilitating human curator to decide on the final annotation. Keywords: regulatory networks, TSS, CDRM, SVM, CpG Island detector, GCPlotAvailability: Executable file of this program is available free of charge for non-commercial use only.  Contact the corresponding author. The promoter recognition has an important bearing on the elucidation of gene regulation which is one of the most important research topics in molecular biology, but in which many things are still unclear.  It is therefore important to exactly find the regulatory regions, examine them in detail, either computationally or by experiments, and learn the mechanisms that control the expression of genes.  The first description of common patterns in eukaryotic promoters, in the form of weight matrices which are equivalent to linear hidden Markov models, can be found in the groundbreaking publication by Bucher (Bucher, 1990).  Depending on the goals, computational approaches which deal with promoters can be divided into two classes: the general recognition of promoters and the analysis of these regions to identify the regulatory elements in them (or specific promoter recognition methods).  The primary goal for the general methods is to identify TSS and/or core promoter elements for all genes in the genome; the specific methods focus on identifying specific regulatory elements (TF sites) that are shared by a particular set of transcriptionally related genes.  Specific methods can have very high specificity when searching against the whole genome and can provide immediate functional clues to the downstream gene.  On the other hand, because of their broad coverage, the general methods are extremely useful for largescale genome annotation.   From the annotation point of view, promoter identification can help gene finding algorithms to identify the 5' UTRs that can span up to tens of thousands of kilobases and to determine the exact 5' boundary of a gene.  In most cases, gene finding algorithms do not determine the exact 5' end of a gene since 5' UTRs have a very high variation in length and do not show significant statistical properties.  In this respect, to facilitate genome annotation and improve the predictive accuracy in terms of specificity, we developed the integrated promoter prediction program using hybrid methods which have been developed separately in our previous works.  The program, PromoterWizard, consists of three main modules and two auxiliary modules (Kim and Park, 2004; Kim, 2007; Kim, 2010). PromoterWizard is composed of three main modules and two auxiliary modules.  Three main modules are CDRM (Composite Dependency Reflecting Model) module, SVM (Support Vector Machine) module, and ICM (Interpolated Context Model) module.  The CDRM actually represents a combination of first, second, third  and even much higher order or long-range dependencies obtained using the maximal dependency decomposition (MDD) procedure, which iteratively decomposes data sets into subsets on the basis of dependency degree and pattern inherent in the target promoter region to be modeled.  In addition, decomposed subsets are modeled by using a first-order Markov model, allowing the predictive model to reflect the dependency between adjacent positions explicitly (Kim and Park, 2004).  The ICM is essentially a probabilistic decision tree, i. e.  a sparse probability distribution expressed as a decision tree.  The tree construction is identical to constructing classification trees using information gain as the splitting criteria (Quinlan, 1993).  Classification trees associate a class label with each leaf node of the tree.  The labels in our case are the four nucleotide values, and our ICM determines a probability distribution for the base to be predicted given the context in which it occurs.  Probabilistic decision trees have been designed for other applications (Delcher et al., 1999).  The SVM is a supervised learning method used for classification and regression analysis.  Here we employed the polynomial kernel function of SVMlight (http://svmlight. joachims. org/) (Kim, 2007).  Two auxiliary modules are CpG Island Detector and GCPlot.  CpG Island Detector can be used for CpG islands determination and GCPlot can give a clue to discriminating the promoter and coding regions from intron sequences.  These two modules were brought in PromoterWizard to facilitate the end user to discriminate CpG islandassociated promoter from nonCpG island associated promoter.   PromoterWizard is the windowbased JAVA application implemented with JBuilder 9.0 which is a JAVA IDE (Integrated Development Environment).  Windowbased graphical user interface enables users to change the preset default parameter values into the ones tailored to   their analysis intent (Fig.  1).  In addition, the user can get the summary of analysis result on the left frame of graphical user interface which comprises two parts such as analysis environment and analysis result.  The analysis environment part provides the information on input sequence files and the analysis result part furnishes users with the information on sequence name, sequence length, number of CpG islands, number of hit promoters, maximum value of G+C%, minimum value of G+C%, and input sequence data.  The user can get the graphical analysis result on the right frame of graphical user interface, which displays CpG islands (top), G+C% plot (middle), and promoters (bottom) (Fig.  1a).  Users can get the detailed information on the corresponding CpG island or promoter through pop-up window which will appear by double-clicking on it.  In case of promoter, the pop-up window looks like the one in Fig.  1c. The pop-up window displays all the promoters detected by three different methods separately.  The promoters displayed on the main screen are the output of logical product between CDRM, ICM, and SVM, the option of which can be specified through the menu 'Analysis Method'. The important part of computer-based annotation and analysis is concerned with regulatory DNA regions  parts of the sequence that have influence on how and when a gene is activated or expressed.  Our approach belongs to general promoter prediction methods, the primary goal for which is to identify TSS and core promoter region for all protein-coding genes in a genome instead of seeking specific regulatory elements.  According to our previous works, the sensitivity of CDRM, SVM, and ICM was 0.87, 0.86, and 0.71 respectively.  In addition, the specificity of those methods was 0.72, 0.69, and 0.64 respectively.  The result shows that specificity is relatively much lower than sensitivity.  In this respect, in order to improve the specificity and to bring endusers promoter analyses tailored to their intent, we developed an integrated promoter prediction program using hybrid methods.  It was implemented in JAVA and consists of three main modules (CDRM, SVM, ICM) and two auxiliary modules (CpG Island Detector and GCPlot).  Each module can play a complementary role in improving the overall predictive performance and facilitating human curator to decide on the final annotation in terms of promoter determination. 