Significant Gene Selection Using Integrated Microarray Data Set with Batch Effect.

In microarray    technology, many diverse experimental

features can    cause biases including RNA sources, microarray     production     or     different     platforms,     diverse sample    processing    and    various    experiment    protocols.

These systematic effects cause a substantial obstacle in the analysis of microarray data.

When such data sets derived from different experimental processes were used, the analysis result was almost inconsistent and it is not reliable.

Therefore, one of the most pressing challenges in the microarray field is how to combine data that comes from two different groups.

As the novel trial to integrate two data sets with batch effect, we simply applied standardization to microarray data before the significant gene selection.

In the gene selection step, we used new defined measure that considers the distance between a gene and an ideal gene as well as the between-slide and within-slide variations.

Also we discussed the association of biological functions and different expression patterns in selected discriminative gene set.

As a result, we could confirm that batch effect was minimized by standardization and the selected genes from the standardized data included various expression patterns and the significant biological functions.

In    microarray    technology,    many    diverse    experimental features    can    cause    experimental    biases    including    RNA sources    and    quality,    microarray    production    or    different platforms.

Additionally, samples can be collected and processed at different institutions and assayed using different array hybridization protocols.

These systematic effects causing diverse variations present a substantial obstacle to the analysis of microarray data.

Due to the limited     numbers     of     miroarray     experiments,     however, sometimes the indication to use whole data regardless of platforms is increasing.

When such data sets derived from different experimental processes were used, the result of analysis was often inconsistent with little reliable information.

Therefore, one of the most pressing challenges in the microarray field is how to combine the data that comes from the two different groups.

Most    existing    studies    that    have    analyzed    multiple independently collected microarray data sets have focused on the differential expressions, comparing two or    more    similar    data    sets    to    find    the    genes    that distinguish different groups of samples (Breitling et al., 2002; Rhodes etal., 2002; Yuen eta!., 2002; Choi et al., 2003; Detours et al., 2003; Ramaswamy et al., 2003; Sorlie et al., 2003; Xin et al., 2003).

Another type of comparison is exemplified by a study that examined the variability of expression for the individual gene in several human and mouse data sets (Lee et al., 2002).

These studies have exploited the availability of multiple data sets to identify more robust sets of genes than would be found using a single data set.

Recently, the integration of the data sets before the significant gene selection has been introduced using a method by correcting systematic bias of the data sets, Singular Value Decompositions (SVDs) in the yeast cell cycle experiments (Alter et al., 2000), and in a data set containing many soft tissue tumors (Nielsen et al., 2002).

It has been suggested that SVD is an inappropriate method when the magnitude of the systematic effect variation is similar to other components of variations, although SVD is a method to find directions of large variation for removal of systematic effects (Benito et al., 2004).

Distance     Weighted     Discrimination     (DWD),     a modified form of SVM for the adjustment of systematic effects eliminated source effect and showed the good performance (Benito etal., 2004).

However, it still could

not correct some problem such as dispersion of different data sets.

Moreover, previous studies have not been discussed the biological significance for evaluation of integration method.

Here, we suggested a method which effectively integrates the    different    experimental    features    and    selected    the discriminative gene set from the integrated data set using the unique gene selection method, and finally discussed biological significance of selected gene set.

A microarray data set used in this study was consisted of

5    experimental    groups    to    understand    the    molecular mechanism of tumor angiogenesis in vitro.

The HUVEC (Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells) were obtained from    ATCC (American Tissue Culture Collection, USA) and     cultured following the recommended guidelines.

The HUVEC were cultured in 5 different experimental conditions including 1) with serum, 2) upon the matrigel as    an    extracellular    matrix,    3)    with    co-culturing    with YCC-3 gastric cancer cells, which is established from the ascites of Korean advanced gastric cancer patient in the     Cancer     Metastasis     Research     Center     (CMRC, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea), 4) without    serum,    and    5)    combination    of    matrigel    and co-culturing with YCC-3 cells.

The cDNA microarray was performed using human cDNA chips (CMRC-GT, Seoul, Korea) with 17664 genes in 2 batches, which were spotted in 2 different time with the same cDNA clones.

cDNA microarray experiments were performed in triplicates following the established protocol of CMRC in a reference design with the Yonsei Reference RNA of 11 cancer cell line pooled RNA (CMRC, Seoul, Korea, Kim et al., 2005).

This data set included missing entries in the range of 349 to 785 for each experiment, and 16466 genes    without    missing entries were used for further analysis.

We normalized expression     intensities so that the intensities or log-ratios have    similar distributions across a series of arrays.

The method used in this study is that the MAD (median-absolute-deviation) scale estimator is replaced with the median-absolute-value     and     the A-values 1 ) are normalized as well as the M-values 2 ).

Within-slide      normalization      transforms      expression values to make intensities consistent within each array and    between-slide    normalization    transforms    expression values to      achieve      consistency      between arrays.

Normalization     between     arrays is     usually, but not necessarily,    applied    after    normalization    within    arrays.

We applied between-slide normalization to expression data because there were different dispersions between arrays     after     within-slide     normalization.

We     executed normalization    by    using    ’limma'    library    of    R    package (http://www.

r-project.

org).

In order to reduce the bias which can be occurred in each gene expression from different batches, we standardized gene expression ratio to a mean ± s.d.

of 0 ± 1 in each batch respectively.

The standardized expression ratio Zij is calculated as following.

We     selected     discriminative     genes     that     differently expressed in various experimental groups after the normalization and standardization of microarray data set.

The parametric statistical methods, including t-test, were not appropriate to the current data set because the replications of data were not sufficient enough to assume any specific distribution of data.

Even nonparametric method, requiring at least 5 replications of data (Kanji, 1993), was not applicable.

Therefore, we defined a new measure for the discriminative gene selection, based on the variation rather than a mean difference between slides.

The small value of this measure suggests that the expression values of the i th gene have small variation in each experimental group and large difference between different     experimental     groups     at     the     same     time.

Therefore it implies that the i th gene is discriminative.

In the selection of significant genes which have clear expression pattern-over expressed or under expressed - in a specific experimental group, we defined the ideal genes    expressed    in    a    specific    experimental    group.

When    we    defined    new    measure,    we    considered    the distance between these ideal genes and each gene, in addition to variation of expression values of a gene.

It resulted that the selected genes with smaller within-slide closed to expression levels of ideal genes.

We could define     three     ideal     genes     in     the     case     of     three experimental groups as following.

The new metric, MM, was defined as following and

calculated for each gene.

A gene with small MM is considered as discriminative and it is over-expressed or under-expressed in experimental groups.

We evaluated the selected gene set by classification accuracy and used Random Forest algorithm (RF, Breiman, 2001).

We used RF program in    R    package ( http://www.r-project.org ) with the following steps.

(1) Generate n datasets of bootstrap samples {Bi, B 2 , ....... , B n } by allowing repetition of the same sample.

(2) Use each sample B k to construct a Tree classifier

T k to predict those samples that are not in B k

.called out-of-bag (OOB) samples.

These

predictions are called out-of-bag estimators.

(3)          Final prediction is the average of out-of-bag estimators over all bootstrap samples and we get average    of    them    which    is    overall    classification error (OOB error).

We investigated the significance of biological functions of selected     discriminative     genes     that     classified     five experimental groups accurately.

These genes were separated into five gene clusters by k-means 1 2 3 ) clustering method under the assumption that they have five different expression     patterns     because     they     classified     five experimental groups exactly.

We used EASE (Expression Analysis     Systematic     Explorer,     http://david.niaid.nih.gov/ david/) to analyze the significance of biological functions for five gene clusters.

Fig.

1 shows the result of within and between-slide normal­ ization of microarray data.

The last six boxplots in Fig.

1 b had larger inter-quartile range (IQR) than the other box plots.

It means there were larger variations in the 9-1 5 th experiments than the other experiments when only within-slide normalization was applied to data set.

Those experiments were processed experimentally in different batches and this problem was removed by between-slide normalization (Fig.

1c).

M.YCC3 and woSerum experimental groups    were experimentally processed in the same batch differing from the    remainder    groups.

When    we    applied    unsupervised clustering method with whole data set, three experimental groups    (HUVEC,    Matrigel,    YCC3) and    two experimental groups (woSerum, M.YCC3) were separated and groups in same batch were fastened together.

Therefore, we could confirm that some batch effect exists in the data set (Fig.

2a).

With standardization of data, HUVEC and woSurum    experimental    groups    from    different    batches were fastened together and other experimental groups were well intermingled (Fig.

2b), suggesting that the batch effect is minimized.

As a next step, we selected the discriminative genes that classified different experimental groups accurately by the proposed method.

Only three most significant genes had 0% OOB (one out of bag) error.

Table 1 shows the summarization of these selected genes.

We noted that the OOB error did not increase in

classification even though we increased genes to 200 by ranking approach 4 ) (Data is not shown).

When we investigated expression patterns of top 100 genes, the

4) One approach for gene selection which select genes sequentially

from a gene that have the least measure

experimental groups and gene groups were clustered together showing no more batch effects (Fig.

3).

By using new defined metric for gene selection, top 100 genes had similar expression values in the same experimental group and the clear difference between the

groups.

Even though, the clustering result using whole gene set was slightly different from the one using top 100 genes, it showed more specific patterns.

Therefore we confirmed that small set of genes might be more effective to classify different experimental groups.

We analyzed biological interpretations of five gene clusters    by    k-means    clustering    method    and    explored expression    patterns    of    each    cluster    (Table    2).

Five clusters    showed    the    different    expression    patterns    and were    expected    that    such    different    expression    patterns have different biological functions.

In addition, we did significance analysis of biological functions    using    EASE    and    used    top    1000    genes    as background genes.

EASE calculates the degree of significance, EASE score, of biological function including selected gene set.

Fisher exact test can be used for this purpose, however, we offered EASE score.

We should put whole gene set as background to calculate EASE score but used top 1000 genes because of run time error possibly due to huge data size.

Therefore, if we used whole gene set as background, EASE score might be decreased than the values shown in Table 3.

Top 100 genes were concerned with various biological functions corresponding to three categories of biological process, molecular function, and cellular component.

We also investigated the association of expression patterns and

corresponding biological functions for each gene clusters Biological functions in the first gene cluster were mainly related to molecular function.

All of the biological functions of the second gene cluster were about biological processes, which were highly significant.

The third and the fourth gene clusters had not include significant biological functions but those genes were relatively significant in cellular component and biological process respectively.

The fifth gene cluster included genes that had biological functions related to Carboxylic acid metabolism and Organic acid metabolism.

Meanwhile, we observed some ir-regularities.

As in Table 3, the same gene sets had highly significant two biological functions; one is Regulation of cell cycle and Mitotic cell cycle in the second gene cluster and the other is Carboxylic acid metabolism and Organic acid metabolism in the fifth gene cluster.

AA458634,    T49159,    and    Al    524212,    which    were selected as    the    most significant genes, were clustered into the first and the fourth gene clusters.

While AA458634 was concerned as in highly significant function of biological process, T49159 was related to the cell death but not concerned to any significant biological function.

From this, we confirmed that the significant biological functions are caused by the interactions of genes or gene sets, not by the several most significant genes.

We selected seven genes with 0% OOB error from non-standardized data set.

It is relatively larger gene set comparing to the result from the standardized data set and any of them were not consistent with three genes selected from standardized data set (data not shown).

From the functional annotation analysis using DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, http:// apps1.niaid.nih.gov/david/ ), 72.6% of top 100 genes selected from the standardized data set included in any categories of biological functions but 64.9% in the

non-standardized data set did.

Also, the result of cluster analysis of top 100 genes was unbalanced in non­ standardized data set.

Almost half of the genes were clustered into the second gene cluster and only eight and five genes were clustered into the forth and the fifth gene clusters, respectively.

Gene sets expressed in three experimental conditions- Matrigel, YCC3, and M.YCC3- included significant biological functions, while gene sets expressed in the other experimental conditions did not in the non-standardized data set (The least EASE scores were 0.49 and 0.34).

Though the significances of biological functions of the third and the forth gene clusters in standardized data set were low, five gene clusters had relatively significant biological functions.

This means that we could select more discriminative genes representing various expression patterns, which can be interpreted as various     representative     biological     functions     from     the standardized data set.

Most selected discriminative genes from the non­ standardized data were clustered into the same gene cluster meaning that the selected genes had redundant expression patterns.

On the other hand, the selected genes from the standardized data included various expression patterns and the significant biological functions.

It suggests that the problem of redundancy in gene selection was solved by the standardization.

Before     discriminative     gene     selection,     we     applied standardization to expression ratios respectively in each batch to control batch effect.

As a result, we could confirm that batch effect was minimized using dendrogram 5 ).

The selected discriminative genes in this study were selected by the expression pattern but not by the magnitude of expression    ratio.

However    this    method    can    not    be appropriate    when    different    batches    include    biologically significant      differences      because      the      standardization transforms the expression values into a relative score of a gene expression in each batch.

Hence, currently we are on the study about investigating more efficient method that is useful in such condition.

