Optimized Internal Control and Gene Expression Analysis in Epstein-Barr Virus-Transformed Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines.

The Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) is one of the major genomic resources for human genetics and immunological studies.

Use of LCLs is currently extended to pharmacogenetic studies to investigate variations in human gene expression as well as drug responses between individuals.

We evaluated four common internal controls for gene expression analysis of selected hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes between B cells and LCLs.

In this study, the expression pattern analyses showed that TBP (TATA box-binding protein) is a suitable internal control for normalization, whereas GAPDH (glyceraldehyde3phosphate dehydrogenase) is not a good internal control for gene expression analyses of hematopoiesisrelated genes between B cells and LCLs at different subculture passages.

Using the TBP normalizer, we found significant gene expression changes in selected hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes (downregulation of RUNX1, RUNX3, CBFB, TLE1, and NOTCH2; upregulation of MSC and PLAGL2) between B cells and LCLs at different passage numbers.

These results suggest that these hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes are potential cellular targets of EBV infection, contributing to EBV-mediated B-cell transformation and LCL immortalization.

Keywords: lymphoblastoid cell line, internal control, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reactionEBVinfected B cells are transformed into continuously proliferating lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), which provide genomic resources for human genetics and immunological studies.

However, there is a limitation of LCL utilization, due to possible genetic changes in the process of EBV transformation (Shukla and Dolan, 2005; Haas et al., 2006).

It is controversial that LCLs are suitable as an experimental material of genomewide association studies (SimonSanchez et al., 2007).

Nonetheless, the use of LCLs is currently extended to pharmacogenetic studies to investigate variations in human gene expression as well as drug responses between individuals.

For example, gene expression phenotypes were investigated in LCLs for the relative impact of nucleotide and copy number variation (Stranger et al., 2007).

EBV infection induces gene expression changes in B cells, contributing to immortalization.

A number of cellular genes have been identified as targets of EBV infection in various systems, including inducible and stable lymphoma cell lines that have been transfected with particular viral gene expression vectors or infected with EBV (Carter et al., 2002; Kelly et al., 2002; Cahir McFarland et al., 2004; Kang et al., 2005).

For gene expression analysis, appropriate internal controls should be carefully selected to normalize the expression of target genes in LCLs.

Generally, housekeeping genes are used as internal controls for gene expression studies, assuming that such genes exhibit relatively constant basal levels of gene expression under all conditions.

However, not all housekeeping genes are always applied to the normalization of gene expression data under all conditions (Thellin et al., 1999).

It has been reported that the comparison of target gene expression needs particular internal controls that are suitable in different tissues or different physiological conditions in human and other organisms (Selvey et al., 2001; Vandesompele et al., 2002; Lossos et al., 2003; Filby and Tyler, 2007; Theis et al., 2007; Rho et al., 2010).

Among housekeeping genes, GAPDH has been demonstrated to be a good internal control in tumor cell lines (Janssens et al., 2004), while HPRT has been identified as a good reference gene for cancer research when comparing solid tumor tissue samples with normal tissue samples (de Kok et al., 2005; Ohl et al., 2005).

Thus, it is recommended that suitable internal controls should be determined for accu  　　　　rate normalization of gene expression data.

For peripheral blood cells or leukemia/lymphoma cell lines, GAPDH is frequently used to normalize gene expression data (Natkunam et al., 2005; Saunders et al., 2005).

According to our previous microarray data, the choice of GAPDH may be problematic as an internal control of gene expression analysis before and after EBV infection.

In addition, as the use of LCLs is expanded to various areas of genomics, including pharamcogenomics, gene expression analysis of LCLs needs optimized internal controls.

Here, we evaluated four common internal controls for gene expression analysis between B cells and LCLs, applying them to an expression analysis of selected hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes.

TBP was finally selected as an optimal internal control for gene expression analysis between B cells and LCLs.

Peripheral blood was obtained from the Jungang Blood Center of the Korean Red Cross.

FicollHypaque gradient centrifugation was performed to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Amersham).

Primary CD19(+) B cells were then purified by negative selection using a B cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotech).

EBV viral stock was collected from the culture of an EBV-transformed B958 marmoset cell line, which was maintained at 37oC and 5% CO2 for 4∼7 days and then stored at －80oC until needed.

EBV infection of primary B cells and LCL generation were performed as described elsewhere (Hur et al., 2005).

Briefly, EBV-infected B-cells were incubated in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin-streptomycin (100μg/100 unit) for 10∼20 days until clumps of EBV-infected B cells were visible.

The culture medium was then changed with fresh complete medium for subsequent subculture.

When cell numbers of EBV-infected B-cells reached approximately 10 million cells per culture flask, the cells were used for the next passage at a seeding density of 2∼5×105 cells/ ml.

At this point, the LCL was referred as passage number 1.

Next, the LCL culture was divided for continuous subculture with fresh medium approximately twice per week and maintained to passage number 100.

Total RNA was isolated from B-cells and counterpart LCLs from three donors using Trizol (Invitrogen) and treated with DNase I prior to the synthesis of firststrand cDNA using oligo (dT) primer and the Superscript II reverse transcription kit (Invitrogen).

Semiquantitative RT PCR was performed for some selected genes.

Gene expression levels of some selected genes were estimated by semiquantitative RTPCR with the following conditions: 25 cycles of 40 sec at 94oC, 40 sec at 60oC, and 100 sec at 72oC for RUNX3, MSC, and GAPDH and 32 cycles for NOTCH2 and TLE1.

For quantitative realtime PCR, amplification mixtures (50 ul) contained 10∼100 ng of firststrand cDNA template, 25 ul of 2× SYBR Green Master Mix buffer (Invitrogen), and 600 nM of forward and reverse primers (Table 1) for: control genes βactin (ACTB), glyceraldehyde3phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), β2microglobulin (B2M), and TATA boxbinding protein (TBP); and target genes pleiomorphic adenoma genelike 2 (PLAGL2), musculin (MSC)/activated Bcell factor (ABF1), transducinlike enhancer of split 1 (TLE1), Notch homolog 2 (NOTCH2), Runtrelated transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), Runtrelated transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), and core binding factor beta subunit (CBFB).

PCR cycles were 95oC for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95oC for 15 sec, and 60oC for 1 min.

Reactions were run on an ABI HT 7900 (Applied Biosystems).

Relative expression levels, Δ(CTgeneCTcontrol), were displayed as the difference in CT (threshold cycle) between genes of interest and internal control genes.

For the correlation coefficient analysis of gene expression patterns, expression levels of particular genes of interest were normalized to four different reference genes.

Then, correlation coefficients were calculated from the expression levels (CT values), normalized to pairs of reference genes (e. g., ACTB vs TBP, ACTB vs B2M, ACTB vs GAPDH, TBP vs B2M, TBP vs GAPDH, B2M vs GAPDH).

To address the question of whether GAPDH is a suit                able internal control for gene expression analysis of various types of LCLs, we evaluated four common housekeeping genes as internal control genes.

First, we extracted expression data on ACTB, TBP, B2M, and GAPDH as well as some genes of interest from our previous microarray data (Baik et al., 2007), indicating upregulation of GAPDH and ACTB in LCLs compared to B cells.

However, TBP and B2M exhibited less than a 2-fold change between B-cells and LCLs (Table 2).

In addition, with regard to B cell transformation, some genes of interest were randomly selected for expression studies of hematopoiesis and lymphomagenesisrelated genes.

Our microarray data showed that PLAGL2, MSC, TLE1, RUNX1, and NOTCH2 exhibited significant changes in gene expression levels between Bcells and LCLs (Table 2), whereas the other genes (i. e., RUNX3, CBFB) exhibited less than a 2-fold change.

For these selected genes, RT-PCR had similar gene expression patterns for RUNX3, MSC, TLE1, and NOTCH2 as the microarray data (Fig.

1).

Four common housekeeping genes were included in the quantitative real-time PCR of hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes so that relative gene expression levels could be obtained by normalization.

In a comparison of gene expression only between B cells and early passages of LCLs, similar patterns in hematopoietic gene expression were observed when normalized by TBP, ACTB, and B2M but not by GAPDH (Fig.

1B), indicating that the expression pattern of GAPDH deviated from those of the other housekeeping genes.

This result suggested that GAPDH expression might be upregulated in EBV-infected B cells during LCL generation.

Indeed, GAPDH upregulation was seen in LCLs of different passage numbers compared with B cells when normalized by TBP (Fig.

1C).

Next, expression levels of hematopoietic genes were plotted in reference to each internal control (Fig.

1C).

In a comparison of expression patterns between B cells and three different time points of long-term subcultures of LCLs (i. e., L1: EBVinfected B cells, L2: early passage LCLs, L3: late passage LCLs), correlation coefficients of individual expression patterns were calculated by pair wise comparison of normalized expression levels using four different internal controls (Table 3).

For seven genes that were tested, TBPnormalized expression levels of each gene were correlated with ACTBnormalized expression levels, whereas the worst correlation coefficients of normalization between GAPDH and B2M were seen.

This result suggested that TBP or ACTB might be a suitable internal control for gene expression analyses of hematopoiesisrelated genes in various subculture passages of LCLs.

However, our previous microarray data showed that ACTB was upregulated by about 4 fold in LCLs compared with B cells (Baik et al, 2007).

Therefore, TBP was finally selected as an internal control for further gene expression analysis of hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes of interest.

Next, the optimized internal control, TBP, was applied to the gene expression analysis of seven randomly selected hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes in LCLs.

Realtime PCR results showed that gene expression levels of MSC, TLE1, RUNX1, PLAGL2, and GAPDH changed dramatically between B cells and LCLs, whereas those of RUNX3 and CBFB changed slightly after EBV infection (Fig.

1C).

Interestingly, the upregulation or downregulation patterns that were detected in EBVinfected cells were sustained until the middle passage number (100) of LCLs.

Thus, these results suggest that dysregulation of these selected hematopoietic genes may contribute to EBVmediated B cell transformation and LCL immortalization.

Gene expression studies of EBVtransformed LCLs have commonly used GAPDH or ACTB as internal controls for normalization (BaranMarszak et al., 2002).

In our previous study, global gene expression patterns between B   cells and LCLs were obtained from our microarray analysis, in which GAPDH was used as an internal control for validation of gene expression (Baik et al., 2007).

In general, internal control genes need relatively constant basal levels of gene expression in experimental conditions.

However, our microarray data suggested that some housekeeping genes might be dysregulated between B cells and LCLs.

Therefore, we evaluated four common housekeeping genes as suitable internal controls for the normalization of mRNA expression and applied them to a gene expression study of potential cellular target genes of EBV infection.

Our results showed that the transcriptional level of GAPDH increased in the process of EBV-mediated B-cell transformation.

The upregulation of GAPDH might be involved in Bcell reprogramming during LCL generation.

Alternatively, GAPDH might be a direct cellular target gene of EBV infection.

Generally, the expression of B cell-specific genes is lost, and B lineage-inappropriate genes are upregulated during malignant transformation of lymphoid cells, suggesting B-cell reprogramming during EBV-mediated Bcell transformation (Janz et al., 2006).

Therefore, GAPDH may not be suitable for internal controls in gene expression analyses between B-cells and LCLs.

Furthermore, a correlation coefficient analysis for gene expression profiles, normalized by four housekeeping genes, showed that TBP was found to be a suitable internal control in the gene expression analysis between B cells and LCLs.

Moreover, TBP expression level was found to be moderately abundant in B cells and LCLs, as determined by the CT difference between genes of interest and TBP (Fig.

1B).

Although many other housekeeping genes were not evaluated in this study, at least TBP can be used as an optimum internal control for gene expression analysis, regardless of the status of Bcells (e. g., primary, EBV-infected B-cells) or longterm subculture of LCLs.

Thus, we finally selected TBP as a normalizer for further gene expression studies of hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes.

It is known that the hematopoietic genes that were selected for this study are involved in hematopoiesis and lymphoid malignancies.

For example, PLAGL2, a developmentally regulated C2H2 zinc finger on chromosome 8q12, is the main target for pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary gland.

Recently, it was reported that PLAGL2 induced acute myeloid leukemia in cooperation with CBFB-MYH11 in mice (Landrette et al., 2005).

Our results showed that PLAGL2 was upregulated in EBV-infected B-cells and LCLs, suggesting that PLAGL2 may be a potential target of EBV-mediated Bcell transformation.

On the other hand, RUNX family members are heterodimeric transcription factors composed of an α subunit, RUNX, and a β subunit, CBFβ.

Of the three members of the RUNX family, RUNX1 is known as a master regulatory gene of hematopoiesis.

According to the literature, RUNX3 was identified as a cellular target of EBNA2 in the inducible cell line (Spender et al., 2002).

The distal P1 promoter of RUNX1 controls expression of the RUNX1c isoform, while the proximal P2 promoter expresses RUNX1a (AML1a) and RUNX1b (AML1b) (Miyoshi et al., 1991).

RUNX3 represses transcription from the RUNX1 P1 promoter, indicating transcriptional crossregulation of RUNX1 by RUNX3 in human B cells (Spender et al., 2005).

On the contrary, our PCR results showed that RUNX1 expression was downregulated in parallel with slight downregulation of RUNX3 between B cells and LCLs, which is inconsistent with a previous report of crossregulation by RUNX3.

This discrepancy might be due to a different PCR target of RUNX1 isoforms, because the RUNX isoform that we examined in our study was the RUNX1 P2 transcript rather than RUNX1 P1 transcripts.

Musculin (activated Bcell factor1, MSC) is a basic helixloophelix transcription factor, and its expression is restricted to a subset of lymphoid tissues, lymphoblastoid cell lines, and activated human B cells.

MSC (ABF1) expression is restricted to a subset of lymphoid tissues, lymphoblastoid cell lines, and activated human B cells (Massari et al., 1998), suggesting that MSC is a downstream target of the Bcell receptor signal transduction pathway.

With respect to cell growth, EBV infection mimics Bcell activation signals or factors, such as CD40CD40L, IgM, and LPS, so that EBVinfected Bcells exhibit greater proliferation than resting Bcells (Kilger et al., 1998).

Thus, the upregulation of MSC in LCLs might be responsible for greater proliferative activity in EBVinfected Bcells compared with Bcells.

TLE (transducinlike enhancer of split) genes are human homologs of the Drosophila groucho gene.

TLE1 binds to the Runt domain and the C terminus of RUNX1 to inhibit RUNX1induced transactivation of the CSF1 (colony stimulating factor 1) receptor.

Our PCR analysis showed that TLE1 and NOTCH2 were downregulated in LCLs compared with Bcells, suggesting that Notch signaling may be involved in EBVmediated Bcell transformation.

Taken together, our results suggest that the hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes that were tested in this study may be potential cellular targets of EBV infection during LCL generation.

In conclusion, we evaluated four common internal controls for a gene expression analysis between B cells and LCLs and found TBP as a suitable internal control.

Expression analysis using a TBP normalizer allowed us to identify dramatic changes in selected hematopoietic transcriptional regulatory genes (downregulation of RUNX1, RUNX3, CBFB, TLE1, and NOTCH2; upregula  tion of MSC and PLAGL2) during EBV-mediated Bcell transformation and LCLs at different passages.

Therefore, these genes may be potential cellular targets of EBV infection and potential reference biomarkers of LCL generation.

This work was supported by an intramural grant (2010 N74001-00) of  Korea National Institute of Health, Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

