Improved Algorithms for the Identification of Yeast Proteins and Significant Transcription Factor and Motif Analysis.

With the rapid development of MS technologiesy, the demands for a more sophisticated MS

interpretation algorithm haves grown as well.

We have developed a new protein fingerprinting method using a binomial distribution, (fBIND).

Withthe fBIND, we improved the performance accuracy of protein fingerprinting up to the maximum 49% (more than

MOWSE) and 2% than(at a previous binomial distribution approach studied by of Wool et al.)

as compared to the established algorithms.

Moreover, we also suggest a the statistical approach to define the

significance of transcription factors and motifs    in    the identified proteins based on the Gene Ontology (GO).

As the tendency in biology researches has been moved from analysis on few genes/proteins to macroanalysis on more extensive genes/proteins, MS has been recognized as key biotechnology.

In particular, MS can be considered as the most important tool in performing proteomics to understand biological phenomenon of living organisms at the large-scale protein level.

Accordingly, a number of recent researches presented several software     and algorithms that can effectively analyze the results of MS

and relevant researches have been actively    continued (Fenyo, 2000; rogers et al., 2003; Cutler et al., 2003).

While PepSea and Peptldent/Multildent identified proteins on the basis of the number of matches between peptide molecular weight in database and peptide from experiments,     they     didn’t     support     accurate     analysis (Mann et al., 1993; Wilkins et al., 1999; Wilkins et al., 1998).

MOWSE used scoring method that reflected characteristics of database beyond simple matches as calculating frequencies of peptide generated from proteins at 10kD intervals (Rappin et al., 1993).

The researches based on probability are MASCOT that identified more reliable analysis as calculating     the probability that random hit could occur, ProFound    that calculated    probability    values    of    proteins    using    Bayesian approach and research by Wool et al.

that made scoring method using binomial distribution (Perkins et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 2000; Wool and Smilansky, 2002; Clauser et al., 1999).

MassSorter which provides    visual and user-friendly interface is a convenient tool    to analyze data from MS experiment (Barsners et al., 2006).

While MOWSE scoring algorithm that is widely used in general is simple and relatively accurate, it has the limit to    depend    on    relatively    large    masses    among    peptide fragments in experiments.

In accordance with the research by Pappin et al., most proteins are distributed around 50kD and peptides created as hydrolyzing these proteins in trypsin are mainly small fragments.

As reported above, yeast proteins also showed the similar distribution (data not shown).

While most peptides from experiments are small fragments, fragments don’t have substantial effects on MOWSE score, but a small number of fragments with relatively large molecular weight fragment significantly influence on MOWSE score.

As shown in Fig.

1(A), for the performance of MOWSE scoring, its accuracy is substantially decreased when molecular weights of peptides are small.

This phenomenon is also appeared according to intact molecular weight of protein as shown in Fig.

1(B).

The reason is that proteins with larger molecular weights create more peptide fragments and on this occasion, a number of fragments with lower molecular weights are generated.

This MOWSE scoring algorithm is also applied to other peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) programs such as MASCOT and MS-Fit.

Although scoring algorithm in the research by Wool et al.

was based on relatively simple probability, its performance was very remarkable as

shown in Fig.

1.

It demonstrated uniform accuracies regardless of peptide fragment ranges and intact molecular weights of proteins as shown in Fig.

1.

However, its accuracy tended to    be slightly declined because of repetitive sequences.

Accordingly, this study developed fBIND to identify proteins more accurately    as    making    up    for disadvantages of existing algorithms.

Peptide pool    to analyze    PMF    was generated using SWISS-PROT    release 42    and    nonredundant (nr) of NCBI.

Then, only yeast proteins were collected    in SWISS-PROT 42 and NCBI nr and then, theoretical

peptide pool created by trypsin was built up.

This peptide pool consisted of only peptides in 500-4000Da that was experimentally significant among molecular weights of peptides.

Moreover, in consideration of errors caused by biological    experiments, this    study assumed the missed cleavage    level of trypsin    to level 2 and peptides generated on this level were included in peptide pool.

Next, peptide pool generated by the process above and data related to yeast protein were used to construct database    using    MySQL    4.2.13.

Yeast    proteins    in    the database were 5,406 for SWISS-PROT 42 and 9,007 for NCBI nr.

Peptide pool generated by trypsin consisted of 718,106 and 1,040,173    records    for    SWISS-PROT    42 and NCBI nr, respectively.

Like the research by Wool et al.

scoring method in fBIND calculated      probabilities with respect to binomial distribution    as described below and applied overlap penalty to reduce impacts from repetitive sequences (Fig.

3) and proportional relation between molecular weights of proteins and the number of peptides.

The results by fBIND were compared to those by MOWSE and researches by Wool et al.

in order to evaluate performances of fBIND that were modified above.

The    test    sets    for    analysis    and    comparison    of performance randomly selected 100 proteins     from SWISS-PROT release 42 and then 10 peptides    from each theoretical peptide pool.

Next, random error values among e = {-0.999, -0.998, •••, 0, •••, 0.998, 0.999} in the calculated mass of each selected peptide were added up for the test sets.

These test sets proteins were divided into the sets by molecular weight of eacha peptide (<1500Da,

1500-         2000Da,         2000-2500Da,         2500-3000Da, 3000-3500Da,     3500-4000Da)     and     that     by     molecular weight (<10kD, 10-20kD, •••,    180-190kD, 190-200kD) of eacha protein, and each    set was independently analyzed.

It was assumed that missed cleavage was 0, mass tolerance was 1 Da and there was no modification.

Consequently,    as    shown    in    Fig.

2(a,    b),    MOWSE showed low accuracies of 40.4% (SWISS-PROT release 42) and 12% (nr) in PMF with peptides of less than 1500Da.

The    accuracies    of    MOWSE    were    gradually improved    in    accordance    with    increases    of    molecular weights of peptides.

For peptides below 4000 Da, the performances of SWISS-PROT release 42 and nr were improved up to 92% and 79%, respectively.

This phenomenon in accordance with peptide ranges also influenced on performances according to intact protein molecular weights.

As shown in Fig.

2(c, d), as the sizes of proteins became larger, performances were gradually decreased.

Then, in the range between 190kD and 200kD, the accuracies in SWISS-PROT release 42 and nr reached 57% and 31%, respectively.

As shown in Fig.

2, the performances of fBIND didn’t show significant differences as compared to researches by Wool et al.

It is because scoring method of Wool et al.

showed high performances of 99.1% and 97.9% in average in accordance with peptide ranges and protein ranges, respectively, when SWISS-PROT release 42 was applied, as shown in Fig.

1.

The fBIND that considered influences by increases of random hit rates in accordance with increases of peptide fragments and repetitive sequences demonstrated higher performances as compared to researches by Wool et al.

As illustrated in Fig.

3 (a, b), the performances in accordance with peptide ranges were 99.6% and 97.1% for SWIS S-PROT release 42 and nr, respectively, with increases of about 1% and 2% for SWISS-PROT release 42 and nr, respectively, as compared to study of Wool etal.

The performances in accordance with sizes of proteins were

also improved.

The performances were 99.6% and 90.9% in average for SWISS-PROT release 42 and nr, respectively, with increases of up to 10% and 7% for SWISS-PROT release 42 and nr, respectively, as compared to researches by Wool et al.

This study tried to identify proteins more accurately as improving    existing    algorithms    and    analyzed    significant transcription factor/motif analysis to provide useful information on identified proteins.

MATCH™ and PATCH ™     of     TRANSFAC,     representative     transcription     factor analysis tools, are very useful to find out transcription factors binding on specific sequences using position­ specific matrixes and patterns (Matys etal., 2003; Kel etal., 2003).

Moreover, InterPro, the representative motif database, is important database collecting motifs in each protein (Mulder et al., 2003).

However, all of them don’t provide information on how much important it is the contribution of transcription factors or motifs identified by those    tools    and    database    on    functions.

In    accordance with analysis of transcription factors existing on upstream of yeast ORF by MATCH™ and PATCH™, it was observed that a number of transcription factors were abundantly appeared regardless of specific functions including that HIF-1 was appeared up to 1614 times on total 5,406 upstream.

Therefore, this study tried to analyze significant transcription factors and motifs contributing on specific functions using cumulative hypergeometric probability distribution as described below.

First of all, yeast ORF and proteins were divided into relatively detailed function categories of about 105 with reference to data annotated with respect to the process among GO terminology in Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD ) (Dwight etal., 2002 ).

Then , mapping of ORF region on chromosome was conducted using sim4 to acquire transcription factors binding on upstream of ORF included in each function category (Florea etal ., 1998 ).

As reported by Zhu et al., -1000 regions from a translation start site was considered as upstream region and transcription factors in relevant upstream region were analyzed by MATCH ™ and PATCH ™ (Zhu and Zhang , 1999 ).

Motifs of each protein were acquired from InterPro database .

Transcription factors and frequencies of motifs in each function category segmented into 105 categories were calculated and then, transcription factors and motifs characteristically appeared in each function category were analyzed through cumulative hypergeometric probability distribution as shown below.

When    p{X>    i}<    0.001    satisfied,    relevant    motif    is considered as the motifs specifically generated in specific function categories.

Table 1 described the examples of transcription    factors    and    motifs    specifically    generated    in each function acquired by the process above.

Table    1    described    motifs    and    relevant    characteristics existing in each protein.

013527 has integrase motif as the protein included in DNA recombination among 105 segmented    categories.

As    a    result    of    analysis    using

cumulative hypergeometric probability distribution, integrase catalytic domain is a specific motif that is appeared especially a lot in DNA recombination category and it is considered that it contributes on the functions related to DNA recombination of 013527.

This result is the same as

GO mapping results of InterPro.

P00330 falls under G0:0006113 fermentation according to GO mapping of SGD and includes in energy pathway, the upper category.

Zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase superfamily, a motif found in P00330, is especially appeared a lot in energy pathway category, alcohol metabolism and aldehyde metabolism category.

It contributes on functions related to energy pathway of P00330 and has the possibility to take part in other functions such as alcohol metabolism and aldehyde pathway.

InterPro doesn’t provide information on this motif.

In accordance with GO mapping of SGD, P00410 was mapped to G0:0009060 aerobic respiration and included in energy pathway, the upper category.

Copper center cu(A), an identified motif, was a specific motif neither to energy pathway category nor to other categories.

However, cupredoxin, another motif, was appeared especially in the same category as P00410 and also the specific motif in ion transport and response    to    abiotic    stimulus    category.

As    explained above, this study provided information about contribution of    motifs    identified    in    each    protein    through    cumulative hypergeometric    probability    distribution    on    functions    and suggested to broaden function annotation more extensively.

In accordance with annotation of yeast protein with respect to process among GO mapping data of InterPro, about 53% of total yeast proteins could be annotated.

Meanwhile, when significant factor/motif analysis of this study was combined with InterPro, about 83% of total proteins were covered (Table 2).

The detailed GO mapping information is available at http://genepool.kribb.re.kr/pmf/ coverage.txt

As    large-scale    protein    researches    have    been    analyzed, researches    on instrument related    to MS, experimental techniques     and PMF algorithm     have been actively studied.

In particular, we need the algorithm to identify accurate proteins without being sensitive to experimental errors in order to identify effective proteins.

In accordance with the development of MS, a wide range of research results from algorithms of simple matches to algorithms based on sophisticated probabilities has been reported.

Each algorithm demonstrates unique characteristics in accordance with scoring methods.

For example, MOWSE scoring method based on frequency that consists of mainly peptide fragments show lower performances, but that with peptide fragments of high molecular weights demonstrates significantly higher performances.

Moreover, for PMF based on binomial distribution presented in the researches by Wool et al.

the performance tends to be slightly decreased when measured peptide is randomly matched to proteins with repetitive sequences.

Consequently, this study developed the system showing better performances as making up for scoring methods based    on    MOWSE    and    binomial    distribution    among PMF    algorithms    that    have    been    studied    until    now.

Furthermore, this study tried to provide information for interpreting peptide fingerprinting results for researchers as     analyzing     significant     factors/     motifs     related     to regulations and activities of identified proteins as well as for accurate identification of proteins.

In the future, this study will provide information on fBIND with respect to protein-protein interaction data and protein sub-cellular localization information.

The fBIND is available at http:// genepool.kribb.re.kr/pmf/ and supplementary information is available at http://genepool.kribb.re.kr/pmf/lnstruction/ instruction.html

