SSR-Primer Generator: A Tool for Finding Simple Sequence Repeats and Designing SSR-Primers.

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are ubiquitous short tandem duplications found within eukaryotic genomes.

Their length variability and abundance throughout the genome has led them to be widely used as molecular markers for crop-breeding programs, facilitating the use of marker-assisted selection as well as estimation of genetic population structure.

Here, we report a software application, “SSR-Primer Generator” for SSR discovery, SSR-primer design, and homology-based search of in silico amplicons from a DNA sequence dataset.

On submission of multiple FASTA-format DNA sequences, those analyses are batch processed in a Java runtime environment (JRE) platform, in a pipeline, and the resulting data are visualized in HTML tabular format.

This application will be a useful tool for reducing the time and costs associated with the development and application of SSR markers.

Keywords: EST clustering and assembly, homology based search, in silico amplicon, PCR, simple sequence repeat (SSR), SSR-primerAvailability: SSR-Primer Generator is available at http:// 168.188.15.158:8080/ssrpg/.

A source code for SSR Primer Generator is also available from the authors upon request (yplim@cnu.

ac.

kr).

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are DNA elements found ubiquitously in eukaryotic genomes; in SSRs, 16 nucleotides are tandemly repeated.

SSR loci have a relatively high mutation rate, resulting in variation in the number of repeat units.

The instability of SSRs mainly results from slippedstrand mispairing errors during the DNA replication process (Schlötterer, 2000).

In particular, the mutation rate of SSRs has been suggested to increase with the repeat number, with longer SSRs having a mutation bias to become shorter SSRs (Kruglyak et al., 1998).

SSRs are found throughout the genome.

They are more abundant in noncoding regions than in coding regions (Li et al., 2004).

In particular, SSR density in noncoding regions was highest within the 5'UTRs of genes, followed by that in 3'UTRs, introns, and intergenic regions (Hong et al., 2007).

In contrast to non coding regions, coding regions prevalently harbor trinucleotide SSRs, reflecting the codon structure in these regions (Hong et al., 2007).

SSRs are also preferentially associated with generich regions, with heterochromatin SSRs mostly associated with retrotransposons (Hong et al., 2007).

These data suggest that SSR distribution is nonrandom.

In particular, association of SSRs with genes may play important roles in determining gene function, such as altering transcription, translation, RNA splicing or stability (Li et al., 2004).

As an example, the expansion of trinucleotide GAG repeats in the coding region of the huntingtin gene in humans can lead to Huntington’s disease (reviewed in Li et al., 2004).

The nature of SSRs gives them a number of advantages over other molecular markers (Jewell et al., 2006): (i) SSRs show high transferability between related species, with high allelic diversity; (ii) multiple SSR alleles may be detected at a single locus by using a simple PCRbased screen; (iii) SSRs are codominant; (iv) they are distributed all over the genome, but especially occur in association with genes; and (v) analysis of SSRs may be semiautomated.

Thus, SSR markers allow for rapid generation of genetic data from a relatively small amount of sample, with high reliability and reproducibility.

They are particularly useful for genetic mapping, linkage and association studies, as well as for phylogenetic and population studies.

Recently, with the increase in the availability of DNA sequence information, there has been an increased need for automated methods to find SSR loci and design primers for amplification of SSR loci from large sequence datasets; this would be a particularly useful tool in cropbreeding programs where it could aid marker assisted selection as well as estimation of genetic pop  ulation structure.

Moreover, homology-based search for amplicons including SSRs would be helpful to develop SSR markers linked to genes.

Given this need, we have recently developed an application, “SSRPrimer Generator (SSRPG),” which encompasses the following functions: (i) discovery of SSR loci from large amounts of DNA sequence data, including the SSR flanking regions; (ii) design of PCR primers that target amplification of the SSR, (iii) homology-based search for the predicted SSR amplicons, and (iv) visualization of results.

Moreover, SSRPG provides a function for producing SSRprimer pairs that are unique in an analyzed dataset and that form stable duplexes with the template DNAs under a given PCR condition.

The described application is publicly available at the http://168.188.15.158:8080/ssrpg.

SSRPG is a user-friendly web-application for (i) finding SSRs, (ii) designing SSR-primers, and (iii) homology based search for their in silico amplicons in a batch process (Fig.1).

SSRs are searched from an input, which should be given in the form of multiple FASTA format DNA sequences, by SPUTNIK.

The resulting output is a combined result table providing summary information of the SSRs identified, and that includes the repeat types identified, the motifs involved, their positions, length, repeat scores, and the flanking regions.

After a search for SSRs, sequences containing the SSRs and their flanking regions and their summary information are used as queries (sequence, SSR-target region, primer product size range, etc. )

that are required for the creation of a PRIMER3 input file.

A PRIMER3 input file is created into which the following parameters are entered: (i) common parameters for all sequences, including required primer size (20 bases), primer Tm (59oC), primer GC% (maximum: 60%; minimum: 40%), Max Tm difference (integer: 1), Max complementarity (PRIMER_SELF_ANY=5), Max 3' complementarity (PRIMER_SELF_END=2), Max PolyX (integer: 3), CG clamp (integer: 0), Max 3' stability (integer: 9), and Max Ns accepted (integer: 0); and (ii) parameters for individual sequences, including primer sequence ID, nucleotide sequence containing the SSR derived from the first step (SSR search), the SSR target region, and the product size range (minimum: 150 bases).

These parameters have been set as strict criteria to ensure robust PCR amplification in Brassica species.

SSRprimers are designed from the complete input by PRIMER3, and the resulting output (i. e., SSR ID, PCR product size, primer ID, primer sequence, primer length, primer Tm, primer GC%) is parsed.

To increase the stability of primers as well as PCR efficiency, primer pairs with simple repetitive DNA sequences are filtered from the full list of primer sets, and similarly, crosshomologous primer pairs showing high sequence similarity (i. e., ≥90%) between different primer pairs are also filtered out.

However, if one of such a pair of primers is unique, the pair is not removed from the full list of primer sets, because it may bring about specific amplification in a given template.

The resulting in silico amplicons (SSR PCR products) can be selectively searched against NCBI nonredundant protein sequence database by using BLASTX, with adjustment of cutoff Evalue (i. e., 1E20), and best BLAST hit for each amplicon is parsed (i. e., score,  E-value, description, and alignment result).

This analysis provides information whether the SSR amplicons are associated with protein-coding regions.

Selectively, the use of nucleotide sequence database, including promoters, 5'/ 3'-UTRs, exons, and introns, with BLASTN enable to analyze the genomic feature for amplicons.

However, this step will be available with an administration authorization after local installation of SSRPG because of dependence on server performance.

A source code for SSRPrimer Generator is also available from the authors upon request (yplim@ cnu.

ac.

kr).

To produce SSR-primers from unique, contiguous transcript sequence data, ESTs can be clustered and assembled by TGICL (Pertea et al., 2003), and the resulting contig and singleton sequences can then be used as a query for the analysis process in SSRPG.

As another option, redundancy between different primer datasets that have been generated in different work flows can be assessed.

This process would prevent duplication in primer orders when primers are derived from the same DNA region.

After completion of each process, the corresponding data on SSRs, SSR-primers, and BLAST search are visualized in HTML format and can be downloaded as a tab-delimited text file.

In particular, because the results are cross-linked to each other, co-visualization of different data is allowed in HTML format.

All results produced from each process are also stored into a MySQL database.

SSRPG is supported on Linux and on Java Virtual Machine (JVM) operating systems.

The programs (i. e., SPUTNIK, PRIMER3, BLAST, and Python scripts for data parsing and filtering), which make up the analysis pipeline shown in Fig.1, are batch-processed with supporting of JSP programming.

Data processing and input and output services are implemented as servlets running in an Apache Tomcat container on a Webserver.

A MySQL database is also used to manage data that are produced during corresponding analysis processes.

SSRPG provides some advantages for discovering SSRs and designing SSR-primers: (i) It uses multiple FASTA format DNA sequences; (ii) it provides ease of use through access to the web; (iii) it allows batch processing of the analysis pipeline; (iv) it allows extraprocessing for increasing the stability of primers (filtering of primer sets with repeat sequences and with crosshomology between different data sets); and (v) it allows crosslinking between different results in HTMLbased tabular format (viz., data integration).

Moreover, homologybased search for in silico amplicons would be helpful to develop SSR markers linked to genes.

Such an approach also enables one to identify marker transferability between closely related genomes by comparing amplicons to other related genomic sequences.

For performance testing of SSRPG, 197,047 genomic survey sequences (GSSs) and 148,391 expressed sequence tag (EST) sequences of Brassica rapa ssp.

pekinensis were processed in SSRPG.

In particular, ESTs were initially clustered and assembled by TGICL, and a total of 16,834 unique sequences were analyzed.

Based on the type of primary SSR motif, a total of 29,245 and 4,101 SSRs were found in the GSS and EST datasets, respectively, and of those SSRs found, 10% for GSS and 17% for EST were finally designed as SSRprimer pairs (Table 1).

Because of the use of stringent parameters for primer design as well as the filtration process that removes the primer pairs having simple repetitive DNA sequences and/or showing crosshomology with high sequence similarity, those SSRprimers will enable robust PCR amplification.

To test the utility of SSRprimers designed, we performed the PCR assay with 150 and 114 sampled GSS and ESTderived primer sets, respectively.

The resulting assay revealed a high success rate of PCR amplification (98.7% for GSS and 95.6% for EST) (Table 1).

Moreover, clear single amplicon was observed in the assay regardless of repeat types (data not shown).

This result supports that SSRPG produces SSRprimers with high specificity and stability for PCR.

Additionally, in the primer design, SSRs with C or Gcontaining motif (i. e., AC, AAG, ATC, AAC, AGG, AGC, ACT, CCG, AAAG motifs) showed relatively high success rate comparing to those with ATrich motif (i. e., AT, AAT, and AAAT motifs) (Table 1).

This suggests that the degree of GC content as well as low complexity in SSRs and their flanking regions affect the determination of target regions for SSRprimer design.

SSRPG is a userfriendly web application for (i) SSR discovery, (ii) SSRprimer design, and (iii) homology   search of in silico amplicons from a large amount of DNA sequences in a batch process.

This application will greatly reduce the time and costs associated with the development and application of SSR markers in endeavors such as genetic mapping, association mapping, comparative analysis (viz., the study of synteny), and phylogenetics.

Moreover, this will be a useful tool to provide public SSR marker resources, which would, in turn, promote sharing of the associated analysis data.

