Detection of hydin Gene Duplication in Personal Genome Sequence Data.

Human personal genome sequencing can be done with high efficiency by aligning a huge number of short reads derived from various next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies to the reference genome sequence.

One of the major obstacles is the incompleteness of human reference genome.

We tried to analyze the effect of hidden gene duplication on the NGS data using the known example of hydin gene.

Hydin2, a duplicated copy of hydin on chromosome 16q22, has been recently found to be localized to chromosome 1q21, and is not included in the current version of standard human genome reference.

We found that all of eight personal genome data published so far do not contain hydin2, and there is large number of nsSNPs in hydin.

The heterozygosity of those nsSNPs was significantly higher than expected.

The sequence coverage depth in hydin gene was about two fold of average depth.

We believe that these unique finding of hydin can be used as useful indicators to discover new hidden multiplication in human genome.

Next generation sequencing (NGS) technology has made personal genome sequencing possible in the laboratory scale by decreasing the cost and time for genome sequencing (Tucker et al., 2009; Yngvadottir, 2009).

We have recently finished the whole genome sequencing of a Korean male (AK1) (Kim et al., 2009) and a Korean female (AK2) (unpublished).

At least five more personal genomes have also been reported to be sequenced by NGS technology (Ahn et al., 2009; Bentley et al., 2008; McKernan et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2008; Wheeler et al., 2008) One of the major drawbacks in NGS technology is relative short read length compared to the conventional capillary sequencing.

For this reason, the read sequences have to be aligned to one reference sequence rather than being assembled with each others.

The most frequently used reference is the human reference genome sequence derived from the Human Genome Project (IHGSC, 2004).

Although this reference sequence have been constantly updated and used by number of researchers worldwide , these sequences still have large number of gaps, and are far from being completed.

Therefore, if a part of the sample genome is largely different from the reference or if counterpart is missing in the reference genome, analysis of this part by NGS may be impossible or likely to be erroneous.

In this paper, we tried to study the effect of hidden duplication of human hydin in the reference genome on NGS data.

Mouse hydin was first identified as a candidate gene in the Hy3 mouse model of hydrocephalus (Davy and Robinson, 2003).

Doggett et al.

found that human hydin gene, the ortholog of murine hydin, had been duplicated from chromosome 16q22.2 into chromsosome 1q21.1 (Doggett et al., 2006).

In addition to its localization, the sequences, exon/intron structure and expression pattern based on the EST profile of hydin2 have been identified and are available in public database (http://www.

ncbi.

nlm.

nih.

gov).

However, the exact location of hydin2 insertion in chromosome 1 is still uncertain.

Therefore, build 37, the current version of human reference genome does not contain hydin2 in the sequence of chromosome 1.

During the analysis of nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in AK1 and AK2, we found that hydin is one of the socalled superSNP genes, which have much higher number of nsSNPs than other genes.

When we compared the number of nsSNPs in hydin of other personal genome sequences, all had similarly large number of nsSNPS (Table 1).

The average nsSNP density of hydin in eight genomes (1.66±0.34 per kb coding sequence) were significantly higher than the average genomewide nsSNP density (0.27±0.02, p＜ 10−5).

This finding is less likely to be originated from technical problem in sequencing or analysis procedures, considering that all different genome data showed sim  ilar increase in the number of nsSNPs.

Another clue explaining this finding was the ratio of heterozygous and homozygous nsSNPs in hydin (Table 1).

Heterozygous and homozygous SNPs were 62.5% and 37.5% of total SNPs in AK1.

This pattern was similar in nsSNPs, 61.7% and 38.3% of total nsSNPs being heterozygous and homozygous nsSNPs, respectively.

In hydin of AK1, however, only one of 35 nsSNP was homozygous.

Other seven genome data showed almost same ratio of homozygous and heterozygous nsSNPs.

All these finding might be explained by the gene duplication.

Because there is no hydin2 in the reference genome, all the sequence reads derived from hydin2 as well as hydin had to be aligned to only hydin of the reference genome.

This will make the alignment result as if hydin of these samples were tetraploidy, that is four copies, being double of other areas in autosome.

To confirm this hypothesis, we examined coverage depth profile of hydin in AK1 genome.

As clearly seen in Fig.1, the average coverage depth of hydin gene is roughly 60x, being double of 30x in other regions.

Finally we compared each variant sequences determined as nsSNPs in hydin with the known sequence of hydin2.

The variant alleles of all 35 nsSNPs found in hydin of AK1 with the exception of only one, were found to be same to the wild type alleles at the counterpart position of hydin2 (data not shown).

Because we can not determine whether it comes from hydin or hydin2 when a sequence read is aligned to hydin in reference genome, these data do not guarantee that the difference between hydin and hydin2 could be the only origin of the enrichment of nsSNP genes.

Further sequencing analysis using clone of cDNA and/or genomic DNA from AK1 will be required for complete understanding of more detailed structure of both hydin and hydin2.

We believe that at least some part of the other superSNP genes found in AK1 or other genomes are originated by the hidden duplication like hydin.

Our result suggest that the criteria we found in hydin: 1) enrichment of nsSNPs, 2) increased ratio of heterozygous to homozygous SNPs, and 3) increase in coverage depth, can be used as useful indicators to discover the hidden structural variation in human genomes.

