A Heuristic Algorithm to Find All Normalized Local Alignments Above Threshold.

Local alignment is an important task in molecular

biology to see if two sequences contain regions that are similar.

The most popular approach to local alignment is the use of dynamic programming due to Smith and Waterman, but the alignment reported by the Smith-Waterman algorithm has some undesirable properties.

The recent approach to fix these problems is to use the notion of normalized scores for local alignments by Arslan, Egecioglu and Pevzner.

In this paper we consider the problem of finding all local alignments whose normalized scores are above a given threshold, and present a fast heuristic algo­ rithm.

Our algorithm is 180-330 times faster than Arslan et al.’s for sequences of length about 120 kbp and about 40-50 times faster for sequences of length about 30 kbp.

Sequence alignment is a fundamental task in molecular

biology    to    see    if    two    sequences    are    related.

The    local alignment problem for two sequences is to find a pair of similar     regions,     one     from     each     sequence.

In     many biological    applications    local    alignment    is    more    useful    than global    alignment    because    two    sequences    may    not    be similar as a whole, but they can contain small regions that are very similar.

A most popular approach to local alignment is the use of dynamic    programming    due    to    Smith    and    Waterman    (Smith and Waterman, 1981; Waterman et al., 1995).

The Smith- Waterman     algorithm     finds     a     pair     of     regions     whose alignment score is the highest (which is called the optimal local    alignment).

However,    the    alignment    reported    by    the Smith-Waterman       algorithm       has       some       undesirable properties.

The     alignment     may     include     regions     whose similarity is very poor (Arslan et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 1999).

Also,     the     Smith-Waterman     algorithm     does     not consider    the    lengths    of    local    alignments    in    computing scores,    and    therefore    a    biologically    important    but    short alignment may not be detected(Arslan and Pevzner et al., 2001).

There     have     been     several     approaches     to     fix     the problems     of     the     Smith-Waterman     algorithm     (Goad     and Kanehisa,    1982;    Sellers,    1984;    Zhang    eta/.,    1998;    Zhang etal., 1999; Arslan and Pevzner et a/., 2001).

For example, Zhang et al.

(Zhang et al., 1998; Zhang and Miller et a/., 1999)    proposed    an    approach    based    on    the    notion    of    X- drop, a region that scores below -X for some fixed X>0.

They    consider    only    alignments    that    contain    no    X-drop.

A more recent approach to fix the problems is the use of normalized    scores    for    local    alignments    (Marzal    and    Vidal 1993;    Arslan    and    6.

Egecioglu    (1999);    Arslan    et    a/., 2001).

Arslan    eta/.

(2001)    used    fractional    programming    to obtain     the     optimal     normalized     local     alignment     of     two sequences.

They    also    extended    their    solution    to    find    all local    alignments    whose    normalized    scores    are    larger    than a given threshold by running their solution repeatedly after masking those alignments that are already found.

In this paper we consider the problem of finding all local alignments    whose    normalized    scores    are    above    a    given threshold.

A    local    alignment    whose    normalized    score    is above a threshold will be called a    TNL alignment.

Since small regions are reported in the local alignment problem, finding all of TNL alignments can be more appropriate than just finding a single (optimal) local alignment in applications such    as    gene    prediction    (Gusfield,    1997).

We    present    a fast    algorithm    for    the    problem    of    finding    all    the    TNL


alignments.

Our      algorithm      is      based      on      fractional programming    and    the    banded    Smith-Waterman    algorithm.

The     fractional     programming     approach     uses     the     Smith- Waterman     algorithm     repeatedly     to     obtain     one     local alignment.

Arslan    et    al.

(Arslan    et    al.,    2001)    use    this solution repeatedly    to find all the TNL alignments.

Hence, Arslan et al.'

s algorithm makes a double repetition of the Smith-Waterman    algorithm,    which    makes    it    very    slow    in practice.

Our    algorithm    first    makes    a    careful    selection    of bands    based    on    several    parameters    so    that    the    selected bands     can     only     contain     TNL     alignments     with     high probability.

Then    it    runs    the    Smith-Waterman    algorithm    on the    selected    bands    in    such    a    way    that    the    number    of applications     of     the     Smith-Waterman     algorithm     on     each band is much smaller than that of Arslan etal.'

s.

Experiments    show    that    our    algorithm    is    about    180-330 times faster than Arslan et al.'

s for the data set of human chromosome     X     cosmids     Qc8D3     (GenBank     Acc.

No.

AF030876    (113    kbp))    and    mouse    chromosome    X    clone BAC    B22804    (GenBank    Acc.

No.

AF121351    (123    kbp)) and it is about 40-50 times faster for the data set of human (GenBank     Acc.

No.

L10347     (31     kbp))     and     mouse (GenBank    Acc.

No.

M65161    (32.4    kbp))    pro-alpha1    type the benefit of II collagen, while finding all TNL alignments.

In    addition    to    extremely    fast    speed,    our    algorithm    can change    the    parameters    for    selecting    bands    to    adjust    the time and accuracy of our algorithm.

A string or a sequence is concatenations of zero or more characters from an alphabet X.

A space is denoted by J £    2;    we    regard    J    as    a    character    for    convenience.

The length of a string a is denoted by |a|.

Let a, denote /th character of a string a and a(i, j) denote a substring aa+1 ■■■aj of a.

When a sequence a is a substring of a sequence

a,    we denote it by «<a.

Given two strings a=aici2---a,, and b=bib2 --bn, an alignment of a and b is a*=a2*a2*--a* and b*=hi*fe*-    fo*    constructed    by    inserting    zero    or    more    J's into a and b so that each a* maps to fo* for 1 </<I.

There are three kinds of mappings in a* and b* according to the characters of and a*and b*.

■ match : a*=bi* d,

• mismatch : (a* =Ab,*) and (a* bi* =/= J),

• insertion or deletion (indel for short): either a* or b* is J.

Note that we do not allow the case of «*=&*= J.

If there exists an alignment of a and b whose number of matches, mismatches and indels are x,y and z, respectively, then we call the triplet (x, y, z) an alignment vector of a and

b.

We define the alignment score of an alignment a* and b* with alignment vector (x, y, z) by score(x, y, z) =x-8y ~nz that is, we assume that a match score is 1, a mismatch

penalty    is    8    and    an    indel    penalty    is    y.

We    define    the similarity of two sequences a and b, denoted by S(a, b), to be the highest alignment score of all possible alignments of a and b.

Given two sequences a and b, a local alignment of a and b is an alignment of two strings a and p such a(a and ft{b, and the optimal local alignment of a and b is the local alignment of a and b that has the highest similarity among all local alignments of a and b.

We denote the similarity of an optimal local alignment by SL(a, b).

A    most    well-known    algorithm    to    find    an    optimal    local alignment    was    given    by    Smith    and    Waterman,    which    is known    as    the    Smith-Waterman    algorithm    (SW    algorithm for    short)    (Smith    and    Waterman,    1981;    Waterman,    1995).

Given     two     sequences     a(\a\=m)     and     b(\b\=n),     the     SW algorithm computes SL(a, b) using a dynamic programming table (called the H table) of size (m+1)(n+1).

Let H., for ()<i <m    and    0<j<n    denote    SL(a(l,    i),    b(l,j)).

Then,    can    be

computed by the following recurrence:

Among all Hu for 0<i<m and 0<j<n, the highest value is SL(a,    b),    and    the    SW    algorithm    takes    0(mn)    time    to compute it.

Since the SW algorithm does not consider the lengths of local    alignments,    the    solution    of    the    SW    algorithm    may include some regions with very low similarity.

Moreover, a biologically    important    short    alignment    may    not    be    detected (Arslan     and     Pevzner     et     al.,     2001;     Alexandrov     and Solovyev,    1998;    Zhang    and    Miller    etal.,    1999).

To    handle these    problems,    the    notion    of    normalization    for    similarity has been introduced (Arslan 6.

Egecioglu (1999), Arslan et al.,    2001;    Egecioglu    and    Ibel,    1996;    Marzal    and    Vidal,

1993; Alexandrov and Solovyev, 1998).

Given two sequences a and b, we define the normalized similarity of a and b by, S(a, b)/(\aMb\+L), where L is a constant.

From    this    definition    we    can    define    a    normalized alignment     score     for     local     alignment:     the     normalized alignment score of an alignment a* and b* with alignment vector    (x,    y,    z)    is    defined    by    nscore    (x,    y,    z)    =

\+2 y +z+L    (Arslan    and    Pevzner    etal.,    2001).

The    opti­

ma/    normalized    local    alignment    of    a    and    b    is    the    local alignment    of    a    and    b    that    has    the    highest    normalized alignment score.

Here    we    consider    two    problems    related    to    normalized local alignment: one is to find the optimal normalized local alignment of a and fr, the other is to find all normalized local alignments of a and b above some threshold Ts.

Given two sequences a and b, let AV(a, b) be the set of all possible alignment vectors of a{a that ft{b.

The problem of finding    an    optimal    local    alignment    (LA    problem    for    short) and    that    of    finding    an    optimal    normalized    local    alignment (NLA problem for short) are defined as follows:

LA problem : Find (x, y, z) e AV(a, b) such that score(x, y,

z) is greatest inAVfaz, b).

NLA problem : Find (x, y, z) e AV(a, b) such that

nscore(x, y, z) is greatest in AV(a, b).

Note    that    we    can    find    the    score    of    an    optimal    local alignment    using    the    SW    algorithm    but    with    a    simple modification    of    storing    the    starting    position    of    each    score, we can also find the location of the optimal local alignment.

For    a    given    A,    we    define    the    parametric    local    alignment

problem as follows:

LA(A) problem :   For all (x, y, z)EAV(a, b), find the

maximal value ofx-J* y - //z-^(2x+2y+z+L)

A    parametric    local    alignment    problem    can    be    converted into a local alignment problem because the optimal solution of    LA(A)    involves    solving    a    local    alignment    problem    and performing      some      simple      computations      (Arslan      and Pevzner etal., 2001).

We    can    use    Dinkelbach’s    algorithm    to    solve    the    NLA problem.

Dinkelbach    developed    a    general    algorithm    that uses     fractional     programming     (Dinkelbach,     1967).

The optimal solution to NLA can be obtained via a series of optimal    solutions    of    LA(A)    for    different    A’s    using    the following result:

A is the optimal solution for NLA if and only if LA(A)=0.

Dinkelbach’s    algorithm    (Dinkelbach,    1967)    (See    Algorithm 1) starts with an initial value for A and repeatedly solves LA(A), Since the LA(A) problem can be converted into an LA    problem,    it    solves    the    LA    problem    and    obtains    an optimal alignment vector (x, y, z).

Next, it sets A= nscore(x, v, z) and repeats this process until A is not changed any more.

The convergence to the optimal solution of the NLA problem is guaranteed (Arslan et al., 2001).

In    some    biological    applications,    we    need    to find all local alignments whose normalized alignment scores are above a given threshold.

Formally, we define this problem as follows:

TNLA problem :   For given a threshold value Ts, find all (x,

y, z) e AV(a, b) such that nscore(x, y, z)

>Ts.

A    local    alignment    whose    normalized    alignment    score    is above    a    given    threshold    will    be    called    a    TNL    alignment.

Therefore,    the    TNLA    problem    is    to    find    all    the    TNL alignments.

For the TNLA problem, Arslan et al.

(2001) first solve the NLA problem and then mask the solution to repeatedly find the next optimal solution of the NLA problem.

In general, it is highly likely that an optimal local alignment has a long part of exact matches in it.

The banded Smith- Waterman    algorithm    uses    this    phenomenon    and    finds    a solution     very     quickly     for     the     LA     problem     with     high probability    (Setubal    and    Meidanis,    1997).

Many    biological systems    such    as    Phrap    (Green),    STROLL    (Chen    and Skiena,    1997)    and    FASTA    (Lipman    and    Pearson,    1998) are based on this algorithm.

The    banded    SW    algorithm    consists    of    the    following    two steps:

1.

Determine bands

Find all the bands that can have local alignments with high    similarity.

Usually,    a    band    is    defined    by    the information of exact matches and if two or more bands overlap, they are merged into one band.

2.

Run the SW algorithm

Run the SW algorithm on the defined bands.

The entries of Hi.j outside the bands are assumed 0 and they are not computed.

We    first    present    an    algorithm    for    finding    an    optimally normalized    local    alignment    (the    NLA    problem)    and    then present    algorithms    for    finding    all    local    alignments    whose normalized    alignment    scores    are    above    a    given    threshold Ts (the TNLA problem).

Our algorithm for the NLA problem is used as a subroutine in our algorithms for the TNLA


problem.

We    present    an    algorithm    for    the    NLA    problem    of    two strings    a(\a\=m)    and    b(\b\=ri).

Our    algorithm    is    based    on Dinkelbach’s    algorithm    which    is    a    general    algorithm    to solve the NLA problem.

We use the banded SW algorithm to    solve    the    LA    problem    in    Dinkelbach’s    algorithm.

Since we     already     described     Dinkelbach’s     algorithm     and     the banded    SW    algorithm,    we    concentrate    on    describing    how to determine bands.

We    first    introduce    some    definitions    before    we    describe how     to     determine     the     bands.

Consider     the     H     table generated by the SW algorithm in computing SLfa, b).

The fth-diagonal      (or      diagonal      i),      Q<i<m(resp.

-n<f<-1), represents a diagonal that passes through (0, i) (resp.

(-i, 0)) element of the H table.

A band is a set of diagonals and the width of a band is the number of diagonals in the band.

A band i of width k is a set of diagonals from i through i+k-

1.

We say that an exact match (i,j) occurs in diagonal k if a(i,j)=    b(i+k,j+k).

Exact    match    (i,j)    is    maximal    if    a-i^bi+k-i and ai+i=Abj+M.

The length of exact match (i, j) is j-i+1.

We    show    how    to    determine    the    bands    with    given parameters 7), w, and 7k The parameter T is a threshold on the length of an exact match, w is the width of a band, and Tb is a threshold on the weight of a band.

Determining the bands is composed of the following four steps:

1.

Find all maximal exact matches longer than T in each diagonal.

We first generate all suffixes of a and b and sort them in lexicographic order.

Once all the suffixes of a and b are sorted, it is easy to find all maximal exact matches longer than T.

2.

Compute the weight of each diagonal, where the weight of a diagonal is the sum of the lengths of all maximal exact matches longer than T in the diagonal.

3.

Select every band b of width w whose weight is above Tb, where the weight of a band is the sum of the weights of all diagonals in the band.

4.

Merge two bands Bi={di, dj} and B 2 ={dk, — di} into a

single band B={min(d, dk), •••, mwcfd, di)}, if they overlap (i.e.,    i<k<j    or    i<l<j).

Repeat    merging    until    no    two bands overlap.

(Fig.1)

Parameters T, w, and Tb should be chosen appropriately so that an optimal normalized local alignment does not lie out    of    the    bands.

In    Section    4,    we    suggest    appropriate values for Ti, w, and Tb through experiments.

Our algorithm for the NLA problem first determines the bands as explained above and then runs the SW algorithm on    the    selected    bands.

The    speedup    achieved    by    our algorithm over Arslan et al.'

s is due to the following two improvements.

■ We uses the banded SW algorithm to solve the LA

problem    of    Dinkelbach’s    algorithm    while    Arslan    et    al.

used the SW algorithm.

Thus, the speedup achieved by the    banded    SW    algorithm    over    the    SW    algorithm    is reflected in our algorithm.

We    perform    the    step    of    determining    bands    in    the banded    SW    algorithm    only    once    while    we    perform    the banded    SW     algorithm     several    times    in    Dinkelbach’s algorithm.

Since    the    bands    are    the    sets    of    diagonals where    long    exact    matches    occur,    the    bands    in    all repetitions    of    the banded SW algorithm are the same.

Hence, we need to determine the bands only once.

We now present algorithms for the TNLA problem of two strings a and b.

We first give a simple algorithm that finds all    normalized    local    alignments    whose    alignment    scores are    above    a    given    threshold    L    (the    TNL    alignments)    in such a way that a TNL alignment of larger alignment score is found earlier than a TNL alignment of smaller alignment score.

Arslan etal.

(Arslan etal., 2001) also found the TNL alignments     in     the     same     decreasing     order.

Then,     we improve     the     simple     algorithm     by     finding     the     TNL alignments in a somewhat different order.

The simple algorithm consists of two steps.

Step 1 is performed    once    and    step    2    is    repeated    until    all    TNL alignments are found.

Step 1.

Find all maximal exact matches of a and b longer

than    Ti    and    determine    the    bands    as    we    did    in Section 3.1.

Step 2.

Find an optimal normalized local alignment of a and

b using the algorithm presented in Section 3.1.

If the    alignment    score    of    the    found    alignment    is above T, mask the found alignment and repeat


step 2.

Otherwise, terminate.

The     simple     algorithm     finds     the     normalized     local alignments     in     decreasing     order     of     alignment     scores.

Hence, it is guaranteed that every TNL alignment has been found when the simple algorithm terminates.

We    consider    the    speedup    achieved    by    the    simple algorithm over Arslan et a/.’ s algorithm.

Let p denote the number of the TNL alignments.

Step 2 iterates just p times.

Since the time for masking an alignment is negligible and our    algorithm    performs    step    1    only    once,    our    simple algorithm    for    the    TNLA    problem    takes    about    p    times    our algorithm    for    the    NLA    problem.

Also,    Arslan    et    a/.’    s algorithm    for    the    TNLA    problem    takes    p    times    their algorithm    for    the    NLA    problem.

Therefore,    the    speedup achieved    by    our    simple    algorithm    over    Arslan    et    al’ s algorithm    for    the    TNLA    problem    is    the    speedup    achieved by our algorithm over Arslan et a/.’s algorithm for the NLA problem.

As long as all the TNL alignments are guaranteed to be found, the order of the alignments that are found may not be important.

If we find the TNL alignments in a different order,    we    can    find    them    more    efficiently.

The    improved algorithm is as follows.

Step 1.

Find all maximal exact matches of a and b longer

than T/ and determine the bands as in Section 3.1.

Let Bi, B2, “,Bk denote the bands.

Step 2.

For each band B> for 1 <i<k, perform the following.

Find    an    optimal    normalized    local    alignment    within Bi by running the SW algorithm only in Bi.

If the normalized    alignment    score    of    the    found    alignment is above L, mask the found alignment and repeat.

Otherwise, we are done with Bi.

It is easy to see that all the TNL alignments have been

found when the improved algorithm terminates.

We    consider    the    speedup    achieved    by    the    improved algorithm    over    the    simple    algorithm.

Let    C,    l<i<k,    denote the number of the TNL alignments included in band B. and

W the width of B,.

In the improved algorithm, band B, accessed when we find each of C TNL alignments while

the simple algorithm, all bands Bi, B2, •••, B k are accessed

when    we    find    each    of    G+C2+—+G    TNL    alignments.

Note that the improved algorithm accesses B, at least once even if    there    is    no    TNL    alignment    in    it.

Hence,    the    speedup achieved     by     the     improved     algorithm     over     the     simple algorithm is

Remark:   We can consider affine gaps in both problems of

NLA and TNLA.

The affine gap penalty for a gap is defined as 7+/*k, where 7 is a gap open penalty, p is an indel

penalty and k is the length of a gap.

We can include the affine gap penalty in our algorithms for NLA and TNLA by a simple modification of the recurrence of the SW algorithm (Gotoh 1982; Waterman 1995).

We implemented and compared two algorithms for the NLA problem: Arslan et al.'

s and ours, and three algorithms for the    TNLA    problem:    Arslan    et    al’.s    algorithm,    our    simple algorithm     and     our     improved     algorithm.

In     all     our implementations, we considered the affine gaps.

We have chosen two data sets to test the efficiency of the    algorithms:    (i)    human    chromosome    X    cosmids    Qc8D3 (GenBank    Acc.

No.

AF030876    (113    kbp))    and    mouse chromosome    X    clone    BAC    B22804    (GenBank    Acc.

No.

AF121351    (123    kbp))    and    (ii)    human    (GenBank    Acc.

No.

L10347 (31 kbp)) and mouse (GenBank Acc.

No.

M65161 (32.4    kbp))    pro-alpha1    type    II    collagen.

Since    the repeats which    are    biologically    uninteresting    regions    may    have    high normalized      scores,      we      masked      the      repeats      by RepeatMasker      (http://      repeatmasker,      genome.washington.

edu/) before running all the algorithms.

We    implemented    all    the    algorithms    in    C++    language.

The    programs    were    run    on    Pentium    III    866MHzx2    work­ station    with    768MB    main    memory.

The    parameter    values used in our algorithms are as follows: L=2000 (a constant in    defining    normalized    scores),    £=1    (mismatch    penalty),    7 =6 (gap open penalty), /z=0.2 (indel penalty), and T=0.035 (threshold of normalized score).

Our    algorithm    finds    the    same    optimal    normalized    local alignment    as    Arslan    et    al.’s    algorithm    does    even    when w=100    for    both    data    sets.

As    shown    in    Table    1,    our algorithm is about 20 times faster than Arslan et al.'

s for both data sets when w> 150 and Ti< 150.

We have experimented with various values of the three parameters Ti, T> and w, and here we show nine cases for three values of Ti and three values of w and we have chosen an appropriate value of TI for each T. Note that we

decrease T b as Ti increases.

Otherwise, good bands may

be    discarded    since    longer    exact    matches    are    fewer    than shorter exact matches.

Table 2 and Table 3 show execution times of the three algorithms    for    the    TNLA    problem.

We    first    analyze    the ratios    of    execution    times    of    the    three    algorithms.

Assume that the widths of all bands are the same and the TNL alignments    are    equally    distributed    in    the    bands    which include TNL alignments.

Let k be the number of the bands


that our algorithms determine, and k’ be the number of the bands    which    include    TNL    alignments.

Also,    let    t    be    the average number of TNL alignments in a band.

Then, the equation (1) can be rewritten as follows:

kk't

k't+k-k'

Hence, our improved algorithm is faster than Arslan et al’s by the following factor:

where 5 is the speedup of our simple algorithm over Arslan et al.’ s.

Consider the experimental results for the first data set in Table 2.

When w=150, 7/=15 and T>=50, we have 5=80 and k=5, k’=5, t=\/3 (k, k’ are not shown in Table 2 since the number of TNL alignments is 15 as shown in Table 4).

By    the    above    formula,    our    improved    algorithm    should    be approximately 400 times faster than Arslan et a/.’s and the result     (631603/1895=330)     is     similar     to     our     expectation.

(Note    that    the    time    of    the    improved    algorithm    can    vary depending on the value of 71 in each case.)

For another example,    when    w=200,    T<=12    and    71=80,    we    get    5=18, £=24, £ =5 and r=1/3.

Thus, our improved algorithm should be about 200 times faster than Arslan etal’ s and the result (631603/3492=180) shows an approximately same ratio.

For the second data set, our algorithm is about 40 times faster than Arslan et al’ s when w=150, 77=15 and 71=50, and about 50 times faster when w=200, 77=12 and 71=80.

Table    4    shows    the    accuracy    of    our    algorithms.

For example, when w=100, 77=20 and 71=30 in Table 4, our algorithms    find    12    out    of    15    TNL    alignments.

But    as    w increases    and    T    decreases,    our    algorithms    are    getting more    accurate.

Note    that    our    algorithms    find    all    TNL alignments when w> 150 and T< 15.

In addition to extremely fast speeds, another advantage of our algorithms is that we can change the parameters w, Ti and 71 to adjust the time and accuracy of our algorithms.

