Sample Size and Power Estimation in Case-Control Genetic Association Studies In planning a genetic association study, it is necessary to determine the number of samples to be collected for the study in order to achieve sufficient power to detect the hypothesized effect. 

The case-control design is increasingly used for genetic association studies due to the simplicity of its design. 

We review the methods for the sample size and power calculations in case-control genetic association studies between a marker locus and a disease phenotype.

Genetic association studies assess correlations between a disease phenotype and a marker genotype on a pop­ ulation or family-based scale. 

In some respects, testing for an association between a disease phenotype and a marker locus is not different from testing for statistical as­ sociation between any two variables, regardless of being genetic or not. 

Thus, many statistical methods used to analyze ordinary statistical association are also used for genetic association. 

However, there are important differ­ ences between genetic association and statistical asso­ ciation in the study design and analysis.

Genetic association studies have been mostly performed in a case-control study setting that has been well developed for use in epidemiological methods (Romero et al., 2002). 

The case-control design is increasingly used for genetic association studies due to its simplicity in design. 

Significant differences in allele frequencies or genotype frequencies between cases and controls are taken as evidence for involvement of an allele or genotype in disease susceptibility. 

In planning a genetic association study, it is necessary to determine the number of samples to be collected for the study in order to achieve sufficient power to detect the hypothesized effect. 

A genetic association study that is conducted without attention to sample size or power information takes the risks of either failing to detect important meaningful differences (i.e., type II error) or taking an unnecessarily excessive number of samples for a study. 

Either case fails to adhere to the Ethical Guidelines of the American Statistical Association which says "Avoid the use of excessive of inadequate number of research subjects by making informed recommendations for study size" (American Statistical Association, 1999). 

While the exact final number that will be used for the analysis will be unknown due to missing information such as lack of genotype information and clinical information, it is still desirable to determine a target sample size based on the proposed study design.

The sample size estimate will allow the estimation of total cost of the proposed study required. 

Typically, the number of samples is computed to provide a fixed level of power under a specified alternative hypothesis. 

The alternative hypothesis usually represents a minimal meaningful difference in the frequency of genotypes or alleles between cases and controls. 

Power (1- probability of type II error) is an important consideration for several reasons. 

Low power can cause a true difference in allele frequencies or genotype frequencies between cases and controls to be rejected. 

However, too much power may make results statistically significant that are not meaningfully different. 

The probability of type I error (a) of 0.05 and power of 0.80 and 0.90 has been widely used for the sample size estimation in genetic association studies. 

In this paper, we restrict our attention to the sample size and power calculations for case-control genetic association studies between a marker locus and a disease phenotype on a population- based scale.

Either the candidate allelic or genotypic frequencies are compared to evaluate genetic associations between cases and controls. 

The geneticist usually prefers comparing allelic frequencies on the grounds that, in the absence of an association, sampling genotypes under Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) is equivalent to sampling gametes, or alleles from the gene pool that gives rise to the population (Lalouel and Rohrwasser, 2002).    

When allele frequencies are compared, the two alleles of each subject are treated as independent Even though comparison of allele frequencies seems to be counter-intuitive because alleles sometimes do not act independently, this approach has been often used in genetic association studies (e.g. Apple et al., 1994; Odunsi et al., 1995). 

Power and sample size for chi- square tests for comparing allelic frequencies can be found in Lachin (1977) and Guenther (1973). 

There are many available statistical software programs that can be used to estimate the sample size or power needed to detect minimal allele frequencies between cases and controls. 

For example, commercial software such as nQuery (Elashoff, 2005) or Power and Precision (Borenstein et al., 2001) or StatXact (Mehta and Patel, 2006) or non-commercial software such as PS (Power and Sample size calculation, which is available at http://biostat.mc.vanderbilt.edu/twiki/bin/view/Main/PowerSampleSize) can be used to estimate the sample size or power based on allele frequencies of cases and controls.

There are two commonly used statistical tests for the estimation of sample size and power using genotypes in genetic association studies. 

One is the Cochran- Armitage linear trend test (Armitage, 1955) and the other is a genotypic association test (Gordon etal., 2002).

Sasieni (1997) investigates the relationship between the approaches of using alleles and genotypes, and con­ cludes that the allelic chi-square test based on alleles is inappropriate when genotype frequencies violate HWE and that the Cochran-Armitage's linear trend test should be used instead. 

The two tests are asymptotically equiv­ alent under HWE. Kang et al., (2005) investigate per­ formances of  the  allelic chi-square test when HWE    is violated.    

They    investigate    the    maximum    and    minimum values of type I error rate of the allelic chi-square test by using nonlinear programming and simulation. 

It is re­ vealed    that,    under    violated    HWE,    the    allelic    chi-square test has distorted type I error rate. 

Allele    frequencies should be compared only when genotype    frequencies are in HWE.

In a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with two possible    alleles,    'A'    or    'B',    there    are    three    possible genotypes, 'AA’, ’AB’, and 'BB*. Study subjects can be classified into a 2x3 table based on each subject’s disease status (case or control) and genotype. 

Table 1 shows the genotype data from case-control studies. Here, the two rows refer to disease status (cases and controls), and the 3 columns refer to the genotypes.

Given disease status, the distribution of genotypes is multinomial with parameter vectors p=(po, Pi, P2) for cases and q=(qo, qi, q2) for controls, where the subscript corresponds to the number of high risk alleles in the genotype. 

Slager and Schaid (2001) specify the values of Pi and qi using the information on penetrances (fo, fi, f2) and the marginal genotype probabilities (go, gi, g2). 

Here, the penetrance fj is the conditional probability P(affected| j copies of disease allele), where j=0,1, or 2 for a di-allelic disease locus. 

The information on penetrance and the marginal genotype probabilities can be obtained from the prior data based on the literature or pilot study or an assumed genetic model. 

The values of p, and qi can be calculated from the following equations.

Once pi and q, are computed from fi and gi, sample size software for Cochran-Armitage trend test can be used to estimate the sample size or power needed for the association between genotypes and disease status. 

Slager and Schaid (2001) provide a sample size formula for Cochran-Armitage trend test, and evaluate the performances of their sample size formula under different disease prevalence, genotypic relative risks and allelic effects such as multiplicative, additive, dominant and recessive models based on high-risk allele frequencies. 

Cochran-Armitage trend test can be obtained as the score test using the logistic regression with a single covariate depending on the individual’s genotype. 

Cochran-Armitage trend test is a locally optimal test for the given set of scores. 

Slager and Schaid (2001) demonstrate    that their sample size formula is generally quite accurate by showing that their empirical powers are close to the expected powers through simulation.

When    the    variance    of    the    Cochran-Armitage    trend test statistic is known, the formulas for sample size and power are readily obtained. In practice, the variance of the test statistics is unknown, and needs to be estimated. 

Freidlin et al. 

(2002) present formulas for the sample size needed    for    case-control    genetic    association    studies pre-specified power when the variance of the test statistic is unknown. 

Since these values are typically unknown for complex diseases such as diabetes, cancer,    and    cardiovascular    disease,    one    considers    a range of values for parameters to deal with such uncertainty. 

Cox and Hinkley (1974) suggest reporting median sample size and/or power values or worst-case scenarios that yield the largest sample size needed or the smallest power. 

This suggestion has been used in several genetic applications (Cousin et al., 2003; Gordon et al., 2005; Zheng and Tian, 2005). 

This suggestion leads us to observe a distribution of sample size (or power) values for the range of parameter values considered, including minimum, maximum, median, and average sample size (or power) values.

Association    between    disease    status    and    genotype    is tested    using    the    chi-square    test    statistic    on    2><3 contingency    tables.    

If    the    chi-square    test    yields    a significant result, then we may say that the marker locus seems to be in close proximity to such a susceptibility locus for a disease. 

Sample size or power can be estimated using the noncentrality parameter, which can be computed from the asymptotic distribution of the chi-square test on 2><3 contingency tables under a specified alternative hypothesis (Mitra, 1958). 

Sample size estimate software such as nQuery can be used to estimate the sample size or power from 2x3 contingency tables. 

Purcell etal. 

(2003) give description of Genetic Power Calculator (GPC) package which performs power calculations for the design of linkage and association genetic mapping studies of complex traits. 

GPC software can be obtained from the website http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/-purcell/gpc/ .

There is considerable mistyping in most genotype data due    to    biochemical    anomalies,    human    oversights,    or shortcomings in genotyping scoring software (Sobel et al., 2002). 

Genotyping errors lead to inflation in type I errors or a decrease in power, and bias in statistical inference in genetic association studies.

Gordon    et    al.,    (2001,    2002,    2003)    quantify    the genotyping error effects on the sample size and power needed to maintain asymptotic type I error and type II error rates for case-control genetic association studies between a SNP locus and a disease phenotype. 

Software PAWE (Power for Association With Errors) to estimate the sample size and power for genetic case-control association studies allowing for genotyping error can be found from http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe/ . 

Software PAWE provides power and sample size calculations for case-control studies with a di-al lei ic locus such as SNP in the presence of genotyping errors. 

The results obtained from data without genotyping errors by software PAWE are identical to those obtained by other genetic association test power calculators, for example, the Genetic Power Calculator    (GPC).    

Software    PAWE-3D    (Gordon    et    al., 2005) plots for power and sample size calculations over a range of parameters including genotypic errors for the Cochran-Armitage linear trend test and the genotypic association test. 

Software is available from the website http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe3d/ .

Kang et al., (2004)     examine which     genotype misclassification errors are    most costly, in    terms of increased sample size to maintain asymptotic power and significance level. 

They use chi-square test for 2x3 contingency    tables    instead    of    2x2    contingency    tables since    the    allelic    chi-square    test    based    on    alleles    is inappropriate    when    genotype    frequencies    violate    HWE. 

Use of allelic test may be inappropriate even in HWE when genotyping errors are present. 

They show    that misclassifying a more common genotype as the    less common genotype requires a larger sample size than the reverse misclassification.

Edwards    et    al.    

(2005)    describe    high    phenotype    mis­ classification    rates    cited    in    several    studies.    

Edwards    et al.   

(2005)    present    an    impact    of    phenotype    error,    also known as diagnostic error, on power and sample size es­ timates for case-control genetic association studies be­ tween a disease phenotype and a marker locus. 

The sensitivity and specificity of the diagnostic test are de­ fined    as    sensitivity=Pr(observed    case    |    true    affected) and    specificity=Pr(observed    control    |    true    unaffected). 

Two types of diagnostic errors are: Pr(observed control | true affected) = 1 - sensitivity and Pr(observed case | true unaffected) = 1 - specificity.

An example of diagnostic errors involves the use of the prostate    specific    antigen    (PSA)    test    for    diagnosis    of prostate cancer. 

Although prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men and accounted for an estimated 220,900 new cases and 28,900 deaths in the United States in 2003, screening for it with the PSA blood    test    and    digital    rectal    exam    (DRE)    remains controversial. Screening cannot predict the kind of cancer a man may have and who will die from it. 

As a screening test, PSA has a sensitivity of about 67.5% to 80% and a specificity of about 60% to 70% when the level is greater than 4.0 ng/ml_ (American Urological Association, 2000; Catalona et al., 1991; Brawer, 1999; Oesterling et al., 1993; Carter et al., 1992). 

Although autopsy studies have shown that approximately one in three men over age 50 has histological evidence of prostate cancer, most have clinically insignificant disease and only about 3% of men will die from it (American Urological Association, 2000).

Edwards    et    al.    

(2005)    conduct    a    genotypic    test    of association using the Pearson chi-square test statistic on 2x3    contingency    tables    in    the    presence    of    phenotype errors. 

Sample size or power is obtained as a function of noncentrality parameter expressed in terms of sample sizes, genotype frequencies, and phenotype error model parameters. 

Zheng and Tian (2005) investigate the impact of phenotype errors on sample size and power using the Cochran-Armitage     trend     test     under     various     genetic models. 

Both Edwards et al. 

(2005) and Zheng and Tian (2005) make a key assumption that phenotype errors are random and independent, and furthermore they are non-differential with respect to a particular genotype. 

Both Zheng and Tian (2005) and Edwards et al. 

(2005) illustrate that phenotype misclassification errors can substantially decrease the asymptotic power to detect association between a trait locus and a marker locus. 

Software PAWE-PH to estimate power or sample size under random phenotype misclassification errors or diagnostic errors is available from the website http://linkage . rockefeller.edu/pawe/paweph.htm.

One of interesting findings is that for many diseases in which prevalence is less than or equal to 10%, it is much more important to insure that cases are truly cases rather than controls being truly controls (Edwards et al., 2CO5, Zheng and Tian, 2005). 

That is, it is much more important to have less phenotype errors in cases than in controls.

Ji et al. (in press) derive the sample size and power esti­ mates using the noncentrality parameter for the Likelihood Ratio Test Allowing for Error (LRTae) in the presence of random phenotype and genotype errors. 

They justify the sample size and power through simu­ lations using various combinations of genotype frequen­ cies, phenotype and genotype misclassification proba­ bilities, total sample size, and ratio of cases to controls. 

Contour plots can be generated using the software avail­ able     at     the     website     http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/lrtae/contour.html.

Afshar-Kharghan      et      al.     

(2004)      investigate      the association    between the risk of coronary heart disease and    the    variable    number    of    tandem    repeat    (VNTR) polymorphism of platelet glycoprotein lb a (GP lb a). 

It is shown that CC genotype is associated with a lower risk of    CHD    events    than    the    other    genotypes    in    African- Americans. Kang etal. 

(2004) show that HWE holdswell for GP lb a VNTR from the data of Afshar-Kharghan etal. 

(2004). 

The B allele frequencies of case and controls in African-Americans    are    0.287    and    0.146    for    cases    and controls, respectively.

Suppose that we wish to estimate the sample size needed to obtain 90% power at a 5% significance level with    an    equal    number    of    case    and    controls    for    the chi-square     test     on     genotypes.     

The     sample     size calculations    are    conducted    using    the    software    PAWE ( http://linkage.rockefeller.edu/pawe/ )     as     follows:     on     the first page, 'Sample size calculations for a fixed power', 'Genetic model free method', 'Douglas Skol Boehnke’, 'Significance    level=0.05';    on    the    second    page,    'Power level between 0 and 1=0.90', 'Ratio of    controls to cases=1', 'Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium for    cases and controls=yes',    'y=0.02'    and    'r|=0.02';    on    the    third    page, 'case    1    allele    frequency=0.287'    and    'control    1    allele frequency=0.146'. Then, the required sample size estimates are 111 cases and 111 controls when no errors    are    present    (When    no    errors are    present,    error model parameters are not important since we only look at the sample size estimates from the results of 'Data Without    Error').    

Let's    assume    that    the    probability    of misclassifying    homozygote    as    heterozygote    is    2%    and the      probability      of      misclassifying      heterozygote      as homozygote is 2%. It is assumed that homozygotes are not    misclassified    as    other    homozygotes.    

The    minimal sample sizes required are 117 cases and 117 controls when    random    genotype    errors    are    present.    

Thus,    the presence of genotype errors results in a 5.94% increase in sample size to maintain the same statistical power.

In this paper, we limit our attention to the sample size and power calculations for case-control genetic association studies between a marker locus and a disease phenotype on    a    population-based    scale.    

In    addition    to    genetic association    studies    using    unrelated    individuals    on    a population-based    scale,    there    are    family-based    genetic association studies, which sample families through one or more      probands.      

Family-based      genetic      association studies are originally developed to deal with problems of population stratification. 

Sample size or power of the family-based    association    studies    can    be    estimated    with the family-based association test (FBAT) statistic (Laird et al.    (2000))    for    virtually    any    given    study    design    and ascertainment    conditions    with    the    interactive    software package       PBAT       ( http://www.biostat.harvard,edu/~clange/ default.htm).

Complex    diseases    such    as    hypertension    and    their complications are the     consequence of     interactions between many genetic    and environmental    factors. 

In general, the genes contributing to risk of hypertension do not have the same effects in different environments, or in different genetic backgrounds. 

Genetic effects may involve gene-gene interactions as     well as gene-environment interactions. 

The software     Quanto ( http://hydra.usc.edu/ gxe/) computes sample size or power    for association studies of genes, gene-environment     interaction, or gene-gene interaction for a variety of study designs such as matched case-control, case-sibling, case-parent, and case-only designs.

In addition to     case-control     association     designs, cohort designs are also commonly used to test genetic association between a disease phenotype and a marker locus when the sample unit consists of unrelated individuals.     

Some     studies     such     as     LUMINA     study (Reveille et al., 1988) and GENISOS study (Reveille et al., 2001) have begun to employ cohort designs to study genetic associations using unrelated individuals.

The advantages of cohort studies over    case-control studies are ascertainment of cases, elimination of recall bias,    and    reduction    of    possible    population    stratification. 

The disadvantages are cost and time needed to recruit and measure genetic and environmental data overtime. 

When the outcome (phenotype) measurements are made overtime in cohort studies, sample size for testing genetic    association    can    be    estimated    using    generalized estimating equation (GEE) approaches for continuous and binary outcomes. 

(Jung and Ahn, 2003, 2005; Ahn and Jung, 2003, 2005). 

Jung and Ahn (2003, 2005) provide a closed-form sample size formula by accounting for    the    missing    data    and    the    correlation    between repeated measurements.
