Comparison of Exon-boundary Old and Young Domains during Metazoan Evolution.

 Domains are the building blocks of proteins. Exon shuffling is an important mechanism accounting for combination of a limited repertoire of protein domains in the evolution of multicellular species. A relative excess of domains encoded by symmetric exons in metazoan phyla has been presented as evidence of exon shuffling, and symmetric domains can be divided into old and new domains by determining the ages of the domains. In this report, we compare the spread, versatility, and subcellular localization of old and new domains by analyzing eight metazoan genomes and their respective annotated proteomes. We found that new domains have been expanding as multicellular organisms evolved, and this expansion was principally because of increases in class 1-1 domains amongst several classes of domain families. We also found that younger domains have been expanding in membranes and secreted proteins along with multi-cellular organism evolution. In contrast, old domains are located mainly in nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins. We conclude that the increasing mobility and versatility of new domains, in contrast to old domains, plays a significant role in metazoan evolution, facilitating the creation of secreted and transmembrane multidomain proteins unique to metazoa. Domains are the building blocks of proteins. Domains functions of multi-domain proteins contribute to our understanding of the proteins (Lee & Lee, 2008). Domains can occur as single-domain proteins or in combinations to form multi-domain proteins (Han, et al., 2007). The analyses of complete genome sequences have revealed that multidomain proteins have increased in number during evolution; twothirds of prokaryote proteins contain more than two domains, whereas in eukaryotes about fourfifths of proteins are multidomain (Chothia, et al., 2003). These data indicate that eukaryote proteins are developing more complex domain architectures and properties, formed by domain duplication and combinations of a limited repertoire of domain types (Ye & Godzik, 2004). The eukaryote exonintron structure suggests that domain accretion can be accomplished by the acquisition of exons encoding one or two domains (Liu, et al., 2005). In other words, protein domains tend to be encoded by one exon, or small combination of exons, that begin and end in the splice frame. The duplication and rearrangement of such exons can create novel genes with revised functional properties. This domain reuse has been described as the exon shuffling theory (Patthy, 1999), mediated by intronic recombination of exons encoding protein domains (Eickbush, 1999) and by the action of retrotransposons (Moran, et al., 1999). Proteins that are composed of a number of discrete domains are termed mosaic proteins, and are particularly abundant in metazoan phyla (Kolkman and Stemmer, 2001). Exon shuffling suggests that the two flanking introns of a domainencoding exon should have symmetric phase combinations (Patthy, 1999). Intron phases are determined by the examination of the translational reading frame relative to the intron, and introns are thus described as phase 0, 1, or 2 introns. Of the nine possible combinations of flanking introns, three are symmetric (00, 11, and 22) and six are asymmetric. The length of a symmetric exon is always a multiple of three nucleotides. Only symmetric exons can be duplicated in tandem or deleted without affecting the reading frame, whereas the duplication and deletion of asymmetric exons can disrupt the downstream reading frame (Patthy, 1996). Comparisons between human exon boundary domains and bacterial domains have indicated that 11 domains are associated with the origin of animal multicellularity, whereas 00 domains are shared between eukaryotes and prokaryotes (Kaessmann, et al., 2002). This comparison also indicates that 00 domains date back to before the prokaryote/eukaryote divergence and can thus be defined as ‘old domains’, whereas 11 domains were created recently and can thus be termed ‘young domains’. In this study, we analyzed eight metazoan genomes and their respective annotated proteomes to explore differences in the spread, versatility, and subcellular localization of old and young domains during metazoan evolution. We downloaded gene structures and protein sequences of primates (human and chimpanzee), rodents (mouse and rat), dog, fish (zebrafish and tetraodon), and worm (Caenorhabditis elegans) from the Ensembl (Hubbard, et al., 2007) database (ftp://ftp. ensembl. org/pub/release45/). The gene data included genomic exon positions, intron phase information, and gene descriptions. Exon phases were obtained by the analysis of the two flanking introns. If several transcripts for any particular gene had been described, we selected the longest coding structure for analysis, to retain the maximum number of domains. The domain content of protein sequences was analyzed with Pfam 23 (Finn, et al., 2006). In this work, we used Pfam domains rather than structurally defined SCOP (Andreeva, et al., 2004) domains, because Pfam domains offer better coverage of genomes, especially for membrane proteins. The positions in proteins of domain hits, with the cutoff E-value of 0.01, were obtained, and the positions in amino acid coordinates were converted to positions in cDNA sequences. We included only genes with more than one Pfam domains for further analysis. Exon-boundary domains in the eight metazoan species were obtained from the positions of cDNA sequences corresponding to Pfam domains, and the positions of exon boundaries. We defined the “domainexon border box” to determine relationships between domain boundaries and exon boundaries. To be classified as an exonboundary domain, exon borders were required to be located inside the border boxes [−10, ＋10] at both ends of a domain (Fig. 1). In forming correlations between a domain and the number of encoding exons, there are three possible relationships: one domain one exon, one domain many exons, and many domains one exon. In this study, we focused on the first two relationships. Subcellular localizations of human, mouse, and rat proteins were extracted from the “subcellular location” comments in the UniProtKB/SwissProt database (Wu, et al., 2006). Only the exact and complete matches to one of the following phrases were included: “Nucleus”, “Cytoplasm”, “Secreted”, “Type I membrane protein”, or “Type II membrane protein”. We excluded proteins with multiple matches and multipass membrane proteins. For membrane proteins, protein sequences were divided into cytoplasmic, transmembrane, and extracellular segments. We extracted exonboundary domains of the eight aforementioned organisms from Ensembl and Pfam results if both ends of the domains encoding exon(s) were located within a “domainexon border box”. Then, exonboundary domains of each organism were divided into nine classes according to the combinations of their surrounding intron phases. We defined a protein domain flanked by phase 11 introns as a class 11 domain and a protein domain flanked by phase 00 introns as a class 00 domain. The numbers of the exonboundary and the class of domains are given in Table 1. To examine which class domains were expanded during metazoan evolution, we calculated the relative frequency of the nine classes of each species and compared these figures. Each relative frequency was obtained by dividing the number of domains of each class by the total number of exonboundary domains. The relative frequency of each class in the eight organisms is shown in Fig. 2, which makes clear that the relative frequency of class 00 domains is higher than that of class 11 domains in C. elegans, tetraodon, and zebrafish, whereas the relative frequency of class 1-1 domains is higher than that of class 0-0 domains in mouse, chimpanzee, and human. All the remaining classes showed relatively similar frequencies. Because class 0-0 domains are related to old domains and class 1-1 domains are associated with modern domains, as described above, these results indicated that the young domains became widely spread during metazoan evolution whereas old domains became under-represented during this process. In multi-domain proteins, most protein domains have few partner domains and appear in a highly conserved order (Vogel, et al., 2004). Certain domains appear, however, in many unrelated domain architectures. That is, they are mobile and promiscuous domains, characterized by their ability to fold independently. This feature prevents misfolding when such a domain is inserted into a new protein and these domains are typically short and show high versatility (Han, et al., 2007). We examined partner domains of class 00 and class 1-1 domains to identify which might be more versatile. To do this, we extracted N-terminal and Cterminal partner domains from class 0-0 and 1-1 domain of the eight organisms, and then obtained distinct partner domains of the two classes of each domain. The average number of distinct partner domains in the two classes of each domain was calculated by dividing the number of distinct partner domains by the domain frequency. For example, if a domain D appears in 5 proteins and has 10 distinct partner domains, the average number became 2.0 (10/5). This analysis shows that class 11 domains had 1.8 partner domain families and class 00 domains had 0.7 partner domain families, on average. The other class domains had 0.81.0 partner domain families. This indicates that class 11 domains are the most versatile, and class 00 domains are the most static. Because class 11 domains are encoded either by a single exon or by multiple exons, we examined partner domains of both exon types to identify which type is more versatile. Domains encoded by single exons had 2.3 partner domain families and domains encoded by multiple exons had 1.4 partner domain families. This indicated that class 11 domains encoded by single exons are the most versatile. To identify the contributions to multicellularity of old and young domains, we investigated whether there were significant differences in the number of old and young domains in the proteins in different subcellular locations. To do this, human protein localization information in the UniProtKB/SwissProt database was used. From this database, we collected a total of 5,339 human genes where subcellular locations were defined as one of the nucleus, the cytoplasm, the extracellular environment (secreted proteins), and the cell membrane. The sub-cellular localizations of protein domains were determined using the protein sub-cellular locations. Of the 8,363 human exon-boundary domains, the subcellular localizations of 3,562 were identified. From these 3,562 domains, class 0-0 and 1-1 domains were selected for study. We observed that the average diversity of class 0-0 domains and class 1-1 domains varied between different sub-cellular compartments (Table 2). For class 0-0 domains, the frequency order was nucleus＞ cytoplasm＞secreted＞membrane (p-value＜9.8E170). On the other hand, the frequency order of class 11 domains was membrane＞secreted＞nucleus＞cytoplasm (p-value＜3.7E-289). The domains in membrane proteins were further divided into cytoplasmic, transmembrane, and extracellular domains. Interestingly, most exon boundary domains in membrane proteins were located in the extracellular region, and most class 11 domains of membrane proteins were located in extracellular regions with a small number of domains found in cytoplasmic and transmembrane segments. Class 11 domains accounted for most exon-bordering protein domains in extracellular and transmembrane protein segments. In conclusion, the analyses of sub-cellular localization showed that class 1-1 domains have been extensively reused in the evolution of membrane and secreted proteins, where they are involved in cell-cell signaling, cellular adhesion, and cellular migration, all of which are crucial to the evolution of multicellularity. In contrast, most class 0-0 domains are located in proteins of the nucleus and the cytoplasm, which means that such domains are not directly related to the evolution of multicellularity. The comparative analyses of exon-boundary domains from human and other eukaryotes suggest that young (class 1-1) domains expanded and old (class 00) domains contracted during metazoan evolution. This indicates that young domains played important roles in metazoan evolution and the contributions of old domains to multicellularity were relatively small. We found that the expansion of young domains occurred mainly because of expansion of class 11 domains amongst the several classes of domain families. The analysis of the versatility of the old and young domains also showed that the young domains are the most versatile; with a versatility index twice that of other domain classes. The analysis of subcellular localization indicated that modern domains are mainly located in the proteins of extracellular regions and in extracellular segments of membrane proteins, consistent with previous studies showing that proteins in extracellular regions evolve faster than those of intracellular proteins (Julenius & Pedersen, 2006). Most old domains are located in the nucleus and cytoplasm. In conclusion, the increasing mobility of young domains played a significant role in metazoan evolution, facilitating the creation of secreted and transmembrane multidomain proteins unique to metazoa. In contrast, old domains became less mobile as multicellular organisms evolved. 