Integrative Analysis of Microarray Data with Gene Ontology to Select Perturbed Molecular Functions using Gene Ontology Functional Code.

  A systems biology approach for the identification of perturbed molecular functions is required to understand the complex progressive disease such as breast cancer.  In this study, we analyze the microarray data with Gene Ontology terms of molecular functions to select perturbed molecular functional modules in breast cancer tissues based on the definition of Gene ontology Functional Code.  The Gene Ontology is three structured vocabularies describing genes and its products in terms of their associated biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions.  The Gene Ontology is hierarchically classified as a directed acyclic graph.  However, it is difficult to visualize Gene Ontology as a directed tree since a Gene Ontology term may have more than one parent by providing multiple paths from the root.  Therefore, we applied the definition of Gene Ontology codes by defining one or more GO code(s) to each GO term to visualize the hierarchical classification of GO terms as a network.  The selected molecular functions could be considered as perturbed molecular functional modules that putatively contributes to the progression of disease.  We evaluated the method by analyzing microarray dataset of breast cancer tissues; i. e., normal and invasive breast cancer tissues.  Based on the integration approach, we selected several interesting perturbed molecular functions that are implicated in the progression of breast cancers.  Moreover, these selected molecular functions include several known breast cancer-related genes.  It is concluded from this study that the present strategy is capable of selecting perturbed molecular functions that putatively play roles in the progression of diseases and provides an improved interpretability of GO terms based on the definition of Gene Ontology codes. A major challenge in molecular biology is the identification of genes or molecular functions involved in diseases and other biological process.  Over the past decades, DNA microarrays have been widely used for this problem due to their ability of parallel monitoring of the genomewide transcriptional profiling.  The conventional analysis of microarray data starts with normalization, followed by the test statistics to compare expression levels in different phenotypes for each gene, yielding thousands of differentially expressed genes (Dhanasekaran et al., 2001).  However, this strategy is limited due to the fact that differentially expressed genes can be analyzed oneatatime.  In addition, most genes are known to function in concert rather than alone, and their products interact with each other and with DNA by forming dynamic topological interactomes.  Therefore, a systems biology approach that can identify perturbed molecular functions with differentially expressed genes would accelerate the understanding the basic molecular mechanism of certain phenotypes or diseases.   The Gene Ontology (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2000) is a database of structured controlled ontology that describe gene product in terms of their biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions.  GO is a hierarchically structure forming an acyclic digraph with topdown directions, which provides an efficient navigation for the structure of the ontology.  However, the same GO term may occur in different lines of ontology structure.  It means that GO may not be represented as directed tree since a GO term may have more than one parent providing multiple paths from the root.  To construct an ordered GO tree for the purpose of global visualization, GO terms need to be distinguished from one another if they are occurred in different locations on the hierarchical classification of gene ontology.  Based on the biological point of view, Lee et al.  (2004) justified that what is more important is not a GO term itself, but which path the GO terms takes from the root in the gene ontology.  It means that each location of a GO term could be considered distinct if a distinct path leads to it from the root of gene ontology.  Therefore, we de  fined Gene ontology Functional Code (GFC) to each GO term based on the definition of GO codes by Lee et al.  (2004).  Note that a unique GO code is assigned to a GO term in each location of the classification of gene ontology.  It therefore means that the visualization of gene ontology based on GO codes will provide more interpretability of gene ontology than the one based on GO terms.   Many progressive diseases such as cancer are caused by combinatorial effect of multiple genes rather than a single gene.  In this study, we integrated the microarray data with GO terms to find the perturbed molecular functions in breast cancer tissues using GO codes in molecular function.  To this end, we identify several perturbed molecular functions that are implicated to play roles in the progression of breast cancer.  The hierarchical classification of gene ontology is basically represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with three categories, namely molecular function, biological process and cellular component (Ashburner et al., 2000).  Based on this hierarchical classification, GO terms can be represented as node by an acyclic digraph.  However, GO DAG is difficult to be visualized as a directed tree since a GO term may have more than one parent by providing multiple paths from the root.  Thus, we have adopted the definition of GO code (Lee et al., 2004; Fig.  1), in which GO terms can be efficiently handled in a tree structure by defining one or more GO code(s) to each GO term, to visualize the hierarchical classification of GO terms as a network.  That is, a GO code is assigned to a GO term in each location of the classification of gene ontology.  A GO term is transformed into a GO code α1α2α3…αH using the unique path from the root of the classification of GO to each GO term, in which H is the length of a longest path from the root to each GO term in the classification of GO.  The GO codes can be represented as nodes in the ordered tree of GO category.  Each node is located on the level N of GO tree for N=1,2,…H.  See Lee et al. ’s (2004) study for more detail of GO code.  In this study, we have focused   on the GO code for the GO term of molecular function, which is defined as Gene ontology Functional Code (GFC).  Note that for the probe set of Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array chip, the distribution of GFC classes and average number of entries per each GFC class corresponding to the level of GFC is listed in Table 1.   To visualize the perturbed molecular functions in breast cancer tissues using GFC, we analyzed the microarray dataset from Turashvilli et al.  (2007), which consists of 2 types of breast cancer tissues; i. e., invasive lobular and ductal carcinomas.  This dataset includes a total of 30 samples that consist of 10 samples from normal ductal cells, 10 samples from normal lobular cells, 5 samples from invasive ductal carcinoma cells, and 5 samples from invasive lobular carcinoma cells, which were microdissected from cryosections of 10 mastectomy specimens from postmenopausal patients.   Before selecting the perturbed molecular functional modules, we applied the two steps of data processing.  First, the log2 transformation of fold change between normal and disease states was applied for each sample array.  Second, the average of log2-fold change was calculated for the probe set of each GFC.  The distribution of average of log2-fold change for each GFC depending on the size of GFCs is shown in Fig.  1A.  It is observed that the GFCs with relatively large size tend to have significantly smaller average values of log2fold change than the ones with small size.  It means that it is difficult to discriminate the perturbed molecular functional modules with relatively large size using the average value of log2-fold change.  To overcome this difficulty, the average values of log2-fold change were z-transformed depending on the size of GFCs as follows.  First, the GFCs were divided into 152 subsets, in which each subset consists of GFCs with same or similar sizes.  Second, the average value of log2fold change in each subset was standardized such that its mean and standard deviation are 0 and 1, respectively.  After ztransformation, it   is therefore more viable to discriminate the perturbed GFCs of which size are relatively large (Fig.  1B). The global network of hierarchical molecular functional classes of GO was constructed using GFC in Fig.  2.  The “ztransformed” average of log2fold change for each GFC was integrated with the network to visualize the perturbed molecular functional modules in breast cancer tissues.  Note that the colored (e. g., red or blue) nodes represent the perturbed molecular functional classes in Fig.  2, and the subnetwork with enriched color nodes could be chosen for further analysis of per  turbed molecular functional modules.  As an example, we chose the two sub-networks with relatively enriched perturbed GFCs in Fig.  2 (A) and (B) for more detailed analysis.   The perturbed molecular functional modules in Fig.  2 (A) and (B) are listed in Table 2 and 3, and the differentially expressed genes for those GFC in Table 1 and 3 are listed in Table 4 and 5, respectively.  Table 2 includes 15 perturbed molecular functional modules that are mainly encompassed by three major molecular functional activities: 1) G-protein coupled peptide receptor activity, 2) immunoglobulin binding activity, and 3) interleukin binding activity.  Table 3 includes 38 perturbed molecular functional modules that are mainly encompassed by peptide receptor activity.  There are significant indications that these molecular functions are associated with human cancers as follows.   The G-protein coupled peptide receptor activity encompasses the perturbed molecular functional modules such as C-C chemokine binding/receptor activity and C-3X-C chemokine binding/receptor activity (Table 2) including differentially expressed genes such as CX3CR1, DARC, CXCR4, and CCRL2 (Table 4).  Recent review study by Dorsam et al.  (2007) addressed that Gprotein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have crucial roles in tumor growth and metastasis and malignant cells often seize control of the normal physiological functions of GPCRs to survive, proliferate autonomously, evade the immune system, increase their blood supply, invade their surrounding tissues and disseminate to other tissues.  Chemokines are leukocyte chemoattractants that are divided structurally into four subgroups, based on the composition of cysteine residues in their aminoterminal portion.  It has been shown that target organs for breast cancer metastases are enriched in the chemokine CXCL12, inducing the specific migration of breast tumor cells that express the relevant receptor for this chemokine, CXCR4 (Muller et al., 2001).   The immunoglobulin binding activity encompasses the several perturbed molecular functional modules such as IgA/E/G/M receptor activity and polymeric immunoglobulin binding/receptor activity (Table 2) including differentially expressed gene such as FCGR1B (Table 4).  Qiu et al.  (2003) demonstrated that human cancers of breast epithelial cancer lines produce immunoglobulins in both cytoplasmic and secreted form.  Their study indicates that prevalent expression of immuglobulin in human carcinomas and its growthpromoting functions may have important implications in growth regulation of human cancers.  Monocyte activation in cancer patients could be an indication of anticancer activity.  However, Goodale et al.  (2009) showed that recruitment of macrophase can promote tumor growth and angiogenesis by analyzing the collected peripheral blood using flow cytometry for monocyte activation.  They demonstrated that metastatic breast cancer patients have a higher monocyte FCGR1B (CD64) index relative to normal donors and localized breast cancer patients.   The interleukin binding activity encompasses three perturbed molecular functional modules such as interleukin6 binding, nerve growth factor binding, and plateletderived growth factor binding (Table 2) including differentially expressed genes such as IL15RA, IL17RB, and PDGFRA (Table 4).  Interleukin17 (IL17) is the core member of a group of cytokines (i. e., the IL17 family), which was identified as a transcript from a rodent Tcell hybridoma by Rouvier et al.  (1993).  IL17 induces the production of many other cytokines (e. g., IL6, IL1beta, TGFbeta, TNFbeta), chemokines (e. g., IL8) and prostaglandins (e. g., PGE2) from many cell types (fibroblast,   endothelial cells, epithelial cells, keratinocytes and macrophases).  It is well known that TGF-beta plays a role as an antiproliferative factor in normal epithelial cells and at early stages of onogenesis (Hill et al., 2009).  The IL-17 family has been linked to many immune/autoimmune related diseases including anti-tumor immunity (Aggarwal and Gurney, 2002).  It should be noted that this study suggests molecular functional modules for breast cancer are down-regulated in Table 2.  The plateletderived growth factors (PDGFAA and B) are important factors regulating cell proliferation, cellular differentiation, cell growth, development and many diseases including cancer.  PDGF and its receptor are important targets in cancer therapy based on angiogenesis (Sennino et al., 2009).    The peptide receptor activity encompasses 38 perturbed molecular functional modules (Table 3) including several differentially expressed genes (Table 5).  There   are significant amount of in vitro observation that peptide receptors are expressed in large quantities in certain tumors.  Reubi (2003) summarized and critically evaluated the in vitro data on peptide and peptide receptor expression in human cancers, which could be considered to be the molecular basis for peptide receptor targeting of tumors.  Moreover, there are considerable amount of genes in Table 5 that are implicated to play roles in the progression of breast cancer or other cancers, including BDKRB2 (Greco et al., 2005), PLCB1 (Naor, 2009), PLD1 (Eisen and Brown, 2002), GPLD1 (Derevianko et al., 1996; Williams et al., 2001), EXO1 (Naderi et al., 2007), ANG (Campo et al., 2005), ISG20/HEM45 (Pentecost, 1998), AZGP1/ZAG (Hassan et al., 2009), ZKSCAN1 (Pennanen et al., 2009), REXO2 (Flanagan et al., 2009), CTDSPL (Murabito et al., 2007), NT5E (Zhou et al., 2007), DLG1 (Fuja et al., 2004), PPM1A (Lin et al., 2006), TIAM1 (Lane et al., 2008), BAG4 (Yang et al., 2006), BRAF (Hollestelle, et al., 2007), CLDN4 (Kulka et al., 2009), F3/TF (Amirkhosravi et al., 1998), FZD1 (Benhaj et al., 2006), NGFR (Reis-Filho et al., 2006), LEFR (Han et al., 2008), RAC1 (Han et al., 2008), PLXNB1 (Rody et al., 2007), IGHG1 (Kabbage et al., 2008), IGHG3 (Bin Amer et al., 2008), TLR3 (Salaun et al., 2006), FBN1 (Chen et al., 2007), DUSP4 (Venter et al., 2005), PTPN3 (Wang et al., 2004), CDKN3/KAP (Lee et al., 2000), and etc.   Based on the integration of GFC codes and microarray data of breast cancer tissues, we present several perturbed molecular functions, which are implicated in the progression of breast cancer.  It was also found that these selected molecular functions include several known breast cancer related genes.  Moreover, it is believed that our strategy provides efficient visual interpretability of microarray data integrated with GFC to understand the perturbed molecular functions in complex progressive diseases such as breast cancer.  Therefore, the selected perturbed molecular functions in this study could be further investigated to understand the basic molecular functions, which discriminate different breast cancer types.        