Phase 3: Disease gene filtering and/or prioritization
Overview
A typical variant call pipeline will produce approximately 3 million variants from one whole-genome sequencing data set and more than 20 thousand variants from one whole-exome sequencing data set [27]. Because disease causing mutations might just be several "needles" in this tremendous "haystack" of variants, rigorous algorithms and high-quality databases are essential to accurately locate the candidate genes. This process is done either by filtering out variants that are not likely to carry a disease risk or by ranking all variants based on biological/statistical models, such that high-risk candidates rank at the top of the list [1, 2, 4]. Unlike Phase 1 and Phase 2, which have largely converged to well-formed computation workflows and platform-free file formats (e.g., FASTQ, BAM, and VCF formats), Phase 3 has more variations in the tools and workflows to suit the different needs of various research or clinical projects.
Annotation
Although many different strategies can be used to search for disease-causing mutations, some general procedures are shared. The first step, variant annotation, typically investigates the potential pathogenic impact of a variant, before any subsequent filtering or prioritizing. The goal is to identify and report the effect of each variant with respect to predefined "features," such as genes. For example, if a variant (SNP or indel) is present within the coding region, the potential effects include change to amino acid (non-synonymous), no change to amino acid (synonymous), introduction of stop codon (stop gain), removal of stop codon (stop loss), addition/removal of amino-acid(s) (inframe indel), and change to the open reading frame (frame-shifting indel), etc. Other than variant call files, the annotation process requires a feature file that defines the location of genomic features (e.g., transcript, exon, intron, etc.), which is usually in browser extensible data (BED) format [28], or generic feature format version 3 (GFF3) format maintained by the Sequence Ontology project [29]. In many situations, the reference genome in FASTA format is also provided as part of the input, and the annotated variants are likely to be platform-specific [30, 31]. Annotation is part of the workflow for almost all variant analysis tools, such as the open source software package VAAST [31], ANNOVAR [27], and many commercial service providers (e.g., Ingenuity, Golden Helix, Geospiza GeneSifter, Omicia, Seven Bridges Genomics, Biobase, etc.).
Once the variants are annotated, a number of methods can be used to predict the severity of a variant, based either on the protein sequence conservation information (e.g., BLOSOM62, SIFT) or the DNA sequence conservation information (e.g., PhastCons). The SIFT [32] score system assumes that protein "motifs" or "sites" are functionally important if they are highly conserved across species. For example, coding regions, active sites of enzymes, many splice sites, and promoters are usually conserved across species [32]. Technically, SIFT uses protein homology to calculate position-specific scores, which are then used to evaluate if an amino acid substitution at a specific location is damaging or tolerated. The accuracy of the SIFT prediction depends largely on the availability and the diversity of the homologous sequences across species. Therefore, the application and accuracy of SIFT are limited if there is limited homolog information or if the diversity is low. The BLOSUM62 matrix [33] is a more general-purpose score system that is based on the alignment of protein homologs with a maximum of 62% identity. The BLOSUM62 matrix is then calculated based on the count of the observed frequency of specific amino acid substitutions. The PhastCons score [34] is calculated based on DNA sequence conservation in a multiple alignment. It uses a statistical model of sequence evolution and considers the phylogeny relationship of multiple species. Instead of measuring the statistical similarity and diversity in percent identity, PhastCons uses a phylogenetic Hidden Markov Model and provides base-by-base conservation scores. Because the PhastCons score is calculated for each base, it can be applied to regions beyond the coding sequence to provide valuable information for prioritizing non-coding variants.
In addition to the conservation information, many software packages also incorporate protein structure information, such as the positions of active sites and secondary structures, into the prediction algorithm (e.g., Polyphen2, SNAP). Polyphen2 [35] combines eight sequencing features (e.g., congruency of the variant allele to the multiple alignment) and three structural features (e.g., changes in hydrophobic propensity) to score an amino acid substitution. The homology search and model training of Polyphen2 are based on the UniProt database. It worth noting that Polyphen2 provides two different prediction models that use different datasets for training, with HumVar tuned to score Mendelian diseases and HumDiv tuned to evaluate rare alleles at loci that are potentially involved in complex traits. SNAP [36] is another tool that uses various protein information, such as the secondary structure and conservation, to predict the functional effect of a variant.
Filtering
After variant annotation, two types of disease-gene identification strategies are commonly employed. A filter-based approach uses a series of criteria to sort out variants or genes that are unlikely to be causative, given a disease model. For example, in a typical workflow of ANNOVAR, variants that overlap with the 1000 Genome Project are removed from the list. Since the 1000 Genome Project aimed to identify common SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) greater than 1%, these variants are thought to be "benign" in a rare Mendelian disease, under the assumption that the causing mutation of a rare disease should have a very low MAF. The HapMap [37, 38] database, which intended to identify haplotype-defining variants in different populations, can also be used for variant selection. In some cases, high frequency of a haplotype can be related to a specific disease, and can help researchers focus on a subset of variants within a specific region. Another commonly applied filter is to exclude non-coding variants under the assumption that a disease-causing mutation should occur in the coding regions and affect protein sequences. Several other filtering criteria are also commonly used, such as filtering variants with little predicted functional impact (e.g., synonymous variants) or having low-quality scores (e.g., low read-depth or low genotype quality score). A disease model can also help filter variants. For example, a disease under a recessive mode of inheritance requires more than one deleterious variant in a gene.
The filtering strategy is intuitive and easy to perform and has been successful in early whole-genome/exome studies on rare, single-gene Mendelian diseases. Numerous tools have been developed to apply various filtering strategies (reviewed in [1, 2, 4, 5]). However, caution should be taken when studying common, complex diseases, because applying hard filters could remove real casual variants. For instance, common diseases could be caused by common variants that have incomplete penetrance (i.e., not all individuals carrying the variant will have the disease).
Ranking
To overcome the difficulties associated with hard filtering, a prioritizing approach ranks each gene or feature based on the cumulative disease risk of potential deleterious variants. As an example, the VAAST tool kit performs the composite likelihood ratio test to determine the risk of a gene or a feature [30, 31]. Information of each variant within the gene, such as the predicted biological impact, allele frequency, and the conservation score of the variant allele, is considered simultaneously under a likelihood framework. One advantage is that it reduces the risk of filtering out potential risky coding variants, since there are no hard filtering steps. Another advantage is that it can score all variants, including non-coding variants that would have otherwise been filtered out. The statistical framework used by VAAST considers two sets of information: 1) the likelihood of observing the MAF of a variant under a disease model versus a non-disease model; and 2) the likelihood that a variant is deleterious versus non-deleterious. A combination of the observed frequency and predicted functional impact of variants is used to assess the disease risk of a gene.
A practical consideration is that most variants in the sequencing study are rare and may be difficult to achieve sufficient power for a statistical model [39]. To overcome this, a common solution is to assess the cumulative effects of multiple variants in a defined genomic region, such as a gene or an exon [39-41]. This approach evaluates the overall genetic burden of multiple rare variants and is referred to as the burden test. Two general methods are commonly used to collapse multiple rare variants [40], known as the cohort allelic sum test (CAST) and combined multivariate and collapsing (CMC) method. The CAST method measures the differences (between case group and control group) in the number of individuals who carry one or more rare variants [39, 42], while the CMC method treats all rare variants as a single count for analysis with common variants [39]. Since both methods implicitly assume that all variants influence the phenotype in the same direction [39, 40], it could introduce substantial noise if a lot of the rare variants are neutral [40]. Alternatives to these two basic methods are also available [40]. For example, by default, the VAAST program combines all variants that have less than three copies in a gene into one pseudo-site for scoring.
Pathway analysis
Pathway analysis is an alternative way to search for deleterious genes. The assumption is that a single mutation in a single gene may not be very harmful but that a combination of mutations in several genes causes the disease. In this type of analysis, variants are put in a context of biological processes, pathways, and networks to gain global perspective on the data. A large number of knowledge bases and tools have been developed for this task (reviewed in [43, 44]). In general, pathway systems contain a curation process that is either manual or automatic, followed by database assembly and refinement [43]. Many public knowledge base and analysis tools are available, such as Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.kegg.jp/); BioCyc (http://www.biocyc.org/), provided by SRI international; PANTHER [45]; Reactome [46]; and DAVID [47]. Optionally, commercial systems, such as Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com/products/ipa), Pathway Studio (http://www.elsevier.com/online-tools/pathway-studio), and GeneGo (http://portal.genego.com/), are also available. Ingenuity Variant Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com/products/variant-analysis) is also backed up with Ingenuity Knowledge Base and can consider the upstream and downstream genes of a variant in a pathway and evaluate the potential role of a gene by incorporating the related genes.