Analysis of Gene Expression in Mouse Spinal Cord-derived Neural Precursor Cells During Neuronal Differentiation.
 The differentiation of neural precursor cells (NPCs) into neurons and astrocytes is a process that is tightly controlled by complicated and ill-defined gene networks. To extend our knowledge to gene networks, we performed a temporal analysis of gene expression during the differentiation (2, 4, and 8 days) of spinal cordderived NPCs using oligonucleotide microarray technology. Out of 32,996 genes analyzed, 1878 exhibited significant changes in expression level (fold change＞2, p＜0.05) at least once throughout the differentiation process. These 1878 genes were classified into 12 groups by kmeans clustering, based on their expression patterns. Kmeans clustering analysis revealed that the genes involved in astrogenesis were categorized into the clusters containing constantly upregulated genes, whereas the genes involved in neurogenesis were grouped to the cluster showing a sudden decrease in gene expression on Day 8. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed genes indicated the enrichment of genes for Pax6 NeuroD signaling−TGFb-SMAD and BMPSMAD−which suggest the implication of these genes in the differentiation of NPCs and, in particular, key roles for Nova1 and TGFBR1 in the neurogenesis/astrogenesis of mouse spinal cord. Genetic programming of multipotent neural precursor cells (NPCs) of the embryonic spinal cord is a critical prerequisite to the generation of neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in vivo. The differentiation of NPCs occurs in highly specific manners both in temporal and spatial aspects (Lee et al., 2003) and results in production of neuronalrestricted precursors (NRPs) and glialrestricted precursors (GRPs), which subsequently develop into mature neurons and glial cells, respectively (Kalyani et al., 1998). in vivo, NPCs generate neurons first and then produce mainly astrocytes (Sun et al., 2003; Cheng et al., 2006). This unvarying sequential generation, the socalled gliogenic switch, is reported to be conserved across vertebrates having a central nervous system (CNS), suggesting its fundamental role in neuronal differentiation mechanisms (Deneen et al., 2006). This sequential generation of neurons and astrocytes can be repeated in vitro. It has been reported that when incubated in growth factorfree culture medium, NPCs from early developmental stages differentiate into neurons, whereas those from late embryonic and early postnatal stages differentiate into astrocytes (Qian et al., 2000). Proliferation of NPCs occurs and stays in the ventricular zone of the neural tube at an early developmental stage. In the presence of intrinsic and environmental signals, some of these precursor cells exit the proliferation cycle and express young neuronal and glial characteristics. The postmitotic cell bodies and differentiating cells are confined within the mantle layer and give rise to a distinct grey appearance. Within this layer, some neurons develop local interconnections, while others elaborate axons to distal targets and form the marginal layer during the process. Glial cells gradually encapsulate the axons producing a marginal layer, which demonstrates a distinctive white appearance in the adult spinal cord. In this way, neuronal and glial cells follow a developmental program that depends on temporal and regional patterning (Poh et al., 2002). Recent progress in the field has improved our understanding of the genetic control involved in neurogenesis and gliogenesis. For example, the identification of the basic helixloophelix (bHLH) transcription factor has allowed us to further understand the molecular regulation of vertebrate neurogenesis and gliogenesis (Bertrand et al., 2002; Kageyama et al., 2005; Lu et al., 2000; Zhou and Anderson, 2002). Despite the identification of intrinsic cellular factors and extracellular cues, the molecular bases of general programs, including sequential generation, are not yet fully understood. In this study, we employed microarray analysis to monitor the tempo ral changes of gene expression during NPC differentiation and to identify the genes playing pivotal roles in the process. Spinal cords of C57BL/6 mouse embryos at embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5) were dissected in Hank’s buffered saline solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells from spinal cords were mechanistically dissociated and plated on T-25 or 6-well culture dishes. For neurosphere formation, cells were grown in DMEM/F12 (1:1, Invitrogen) media with N2 supplement (Invitrogen) at 37oC in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere in the presence of 20 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (EGF; Invitrogen) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, Invitrogen) for 4 days. EGF and bFGF were added to the culture medium every 2 days. Subsequently, the culture medium containing floating neurospheres was collected in sterile 15 ml tubes and centrifuged at 110 relative centrifugal forces for 5 min. The neurosphere pellets were dissociated with trypsin, and single cells were seeded at a density of approximately 4×104 cells/cm2 in 6-well culture dishes or 12-mm glass cover slips coated with poly-L-ornithine (0.1 mg/ml, SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and fibronectin (1 ug/ml, Sigma Aldrich). Cells in the culture dishes were allowed to attach during growth in the same medium for 2 days. Differentiation was induced by withdrawal of bFGF and EGF. These spinal cord precursor cells were incubated under the differentiation conditions for 8 days. Spinal cord precursor and differentiated cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde-containing phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) at room temperature for 10 min. After rinsing several times with PBS, the cells were incubated for 10 min in PBS containing 0.4% Triton X100 and rerinsed with PBS containing 0.1% Tween20 (TPBS). Then, the cells were incubated for 2 h with 10% horse serum or 10% goat serum in TPBS. To reduce nonspecific antibody binding, the cells were incubated overnight at 4oC with primary antibodies depending on conditions; mouse monoclonal anti-nestin (1:100, Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA), mouse monoclonal Tuj1 (1:100, Covance, East Lansing, MI, USA), lowaffinity neurotrophin receptor (p75, 1:100, Chemicon), and GFAP (1:100, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark). After rinsing with TPBS 3 times, the cells were incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate-or Texas red-conjugated secondary antibody (1:100, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) for 2 h at room temperature. Cell nuclei were counterstained with 4', 6diamidino2phenylindole (DAPI; Vector Laboratories) for 10 min at room temperature. Fluorescent images were captured with a Leica DM IRB microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) in accordance with the manufacturer’s manual. Quantification and determination of purity (260/280 ratio) of RNA were performed using an ND1000 UV/VIS spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). A commercial mouse genome survey array was used for differential gene expression profiling (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The array consists of 60mer oligonucleotide probes, representing a set of 32,996 individual mouse genes and more than 1000 control probes. Microarray experiments were performed following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, digoxigenin (DIG)UTPlabeled cRNA was generated by amplification of 5μg of total RNA using a chemiluminescent reverse transcription in vitro transcription labeling kit (Applied Biosystems). Each microarray was prehybridized in hybridization buffer with blocking reagent at 55oC for'h. Hybridization of arrays was then carried out using DIGlabeled cRNA (10μg), fragmented into sizes of 100400 bp, at 55oC for 16 h. The arrays were washed with hybridization wash buffer, followed by a subsequent wash with chemiluminescence rinse buffer. Chemiluminescent signals were generated by incubating the arrays with antiDIG alkaline phosphatase and chemiluminescence substrate. Images were collected for each microarray using the Model 1700 Chemiluminescent Microarray Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Microarray images were autogrided, and the chemiluminescent signals were quantified, corrected for background, and spatially normalized. Signal intensities were imported into GenPlex software (Istech, Korea) and normalized to reduce interarray variation in hybridization intensity after filtering out probe sets with unreliable intensity values (flag value＜100 and S/N＜2). Expression changes were presented as foldchanges in comparison with intensities from the control group. The expression intensities were then log2transformed. We took the average value from the gene expression ratio obtained in 3 biological replicates. DEGs were selected on the basis of ratios (fold change ＞2) and Welch’s ttest (p＜0.05). For further analysis, DEGs were divided into gene clusters according to expression levels at each time point (Chung et al., 2007; Ko et al., 2008). K-means clustering was applied to genes using the Euclidean distance as a similarity measurement, as implemented in the Genesis software program (http://genome. tugraz. at). Additionally, DEGs were categorized according to their biological processes using the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) protein classification system (Applied Biosystems, https://panther. appliedbiosystems. com). To further define the molecular mechanism involved in the differentiation of spinal cord precursor cells, Cytoscape ver. 2.5 software was used for protein interaction analysis to identify potential regulatory genes and pathways. The molecular interaction data were downloaded from the BIND and BIOGRID websites. Each dataset was loaded separately to the software, and 2 distinct protein-protein interaction networks were generated. For each network, the DEGs were mapped, and the proteins that interacted directly with the DEGs were selected to generate groups of subnetworks. The subnetworks were merged into a single subnetwork using the “union” function in Cytoscape, and the nodes interacting with more than 9 proteins were selected. For semiquantitative RT-PCR, beta-actin was used as an internal control. For each sample, the same total RNA that was used for microarray hybridization was reverse-transcribed using 1μM oligo (dT) primer with Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). The thermal profiles consisted of 95oC for 5 min for initial denaturing, followed by 25∼30 cycles of 95oC for 30 s, 55∼60oC for 30 s, and 72oC for 30 s to'min. All RTPCR reactions were repeated at least 3 times. The primers used in this study are listed in Table 1. Prior to gene expression study of spinal cord precursor cells, their differentiation process was monitored by immunocytochemical detection using the most representative neural markers, such as nestin, Tuj1, and GFAP. The differentiation was initiated by removing basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) from the medium on Day 0, and the process was monitored on Days 2, 4, and 8 after the initiation (Fig. 1). On Day 0, most cells in the culture (92.6±1.1%) were nestinpositive, a common characteristic for NPCs, whereas only a small portion (less than 2.5% and 3.5%) of the total cells were found to be tubulin βIII (Tuj1) positive and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)positive, specific characteristics for neurons and astrocytes, respectively. As the differentiation progressed, the proportion of nestin-positive cells in the culture decreased subsequently to 71.0±9.8%, 6.3±2.5%, and 3.7±1.5% on Days 2, 4, and 8, respectively. In the meantime, the proportion of Tuj1-positive cells reached 5.7±1.7% of total cells on Day 2 and decreased gradually thereafter (3.9%±1.4% on Day 4 and 3.3±0.4% on Day 8). It was noticed that a small portion of the Tuj1positive cells were also immunoreactive to anti-p75 antibody on Days 2, 4, and 8, which is a characteristic of motoneurons in the developing neural tube (Camu and Henderson, 1992). The number of GFAP-positive cells increased along the differentiation process, representing 8.9±0.3% on Day 2, 75.9±6.0% on Day 4, and 86.5± 0.8% of total cells on Day 8. This observation coincides well with a previous report (Kalyani et al., 1997), in which GFAP-positive cells constituted the largest portion (73±6.0%) of the total population of differentiated neuroepithelial cells after 5 days of differentiation. Based on the immunocytochemical observation presented in this study, it was confirmed that spinal cord precursor cells sequentially generate neurons and astrocytes along the process, the socalled gliogenic switch, as described in a previous report (Qian et al., 2000). To examine the temporal changes in gene expression along the differentiation, the expression level of the whole genome was profiled using a microarray. Total RNA from cells on Day 0, Day 2, Day 4, and Day 8 of differentiation was subjected to microarray analysis. Gene expression levels in NPCs (Day 0) were compared with those in differentiated cells (Days 2, 4, and 8). Out of the 32,996 genes represented on the chip, 1878 were differentially expressed more than 2fold at least at one point during the experiment (Fig. 2A and Supplemental data). On Day 2, 517 genes were upregulated and 379 genes were downregulated. On Day 4, 658 genes were upregulated and 403 genes were downregulated. On Day 8, when most spinal cord precursor cells were differentiated into astrocytes, 1554 genes showed modu lated expression levels (Fig. 2B). To characterize the patterns of gene expression along the time course of differentiation, k-means clustering was performed on the 1878 differentially expressed genes. The genes were classified into 12 clusters (Fig. 3). Six clusters showed a gradual increase by Day 8. The expression of genes in clusters A and B was upregulated more than 2fold at all time points. In particular, Cluster B comprised highly upregulated genes (＞eight folds) and included the astrocytespecific marker GFAP. Clusters C and D consisted of genes that were constantly upregulated more than 2fold at all time points. Four clusters contained genes with decreasing expression as the differentiation progressed. Clusters G and K comprised genes whose expression decreased more than 2fold at all time points. To identify genes involved in the differentiation of spinal cord precursor cells, it was of interest to apply an ontological study to the clustered genes. For this purpose, functional enrichment analyses were performed on the differentially expressed genes grouped in each cluster. Table 2 summarizes the list of biological functions that were overrepresented among the differentially expressed genes in each cluster. Based on the enrichment analysis, only clusters A, C, D, and L showed significant enrichment (p＜0.05) of biological functions related to neuronal development, such as development/developmental processes, neuronal activities, neurogenesis, and synaptic transmission. The list of genes that contributed to enrichment of biological function in clusters A, C, D, and L is summarized in Table 3. In cluster C, in which most genes were constantly upregulated more than 2-fold at all time points, we noticed the presence of basic helix-loop-helix domaincontaining class B5 (Bhlhb5). In a previous report, the Bhlhb5 gene was identified as a member of a new subclass of the bHLH family (Bramblett et al., 2002; McLellan et al., 2002). The proteins in this class, as well as members of the HES and ID families, are considered negative regulators of the function and/or transcription of other bHLH proteins (e. g., Mash1, Math, and Neurogenin2) that are necessary and sufficient to promote neuronal differentiation (Kageyama et al., 2005). It has been also reported that the inhibitory HLH factors Id1 and Hes1 stimulate astrogenesis in vitro (Sugimori et al., 2007) and that mouse Bhlhb5 represses a human Pax6 promoter (Xu et al., 2002). Bhlhb5, constantly upregulated along the differentiation, suggests a possible implication of this protein during gliogenic differentiation as a transcriptional regulator. Cluster D, which consisted of 168 constantly upregulated genes, showed significant enrichment of genes related to biological functions, such as neuronal activities, synaptic transmission, and developmental processes (Table 2). Among the genes that belong to enriched biological functions in cluster D, Nkx2.2 and BMP/SMAD have been shown to promote gliogenesis (Lee et al., 2003; Nakashima et al., 2001; Fukuda et al., 2007). In addition, the expression of truncated tyrosine kinase B (trkBt) has been reported to play a pivotal role in the developmental transition from neurogenesis to gliogenesis (Cheng et al., 2006; Climent et al., 2000). These reports strongly suggest a possible association of the upregulation of these genes (Nkx2.2, BMP4, Smad7, Ntrk-2) with gliogenic differentiation of spinal cord precursor cells. Neurogenesis-related genes were found to be highly enriched in cluster L, which showed declining upregulation patterns along the differentiation time. In particular, the Neurod6 gene was upregulated on Days 2 and 4 but decreased on Day 8 in our experiments. Neurod6, also called Nex, Atoh2, and Math2, is a member of the NeuroD family of bHLH transcription factors (Guo et al., 2002) and is a critical effector of the nerve growth factor (NGF) pathway (Schwab et al., 2000). It is also involved in neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells and may be one of the executors of neurogenic function of Pax6 (Holm et al., 2007). It has been reported that Pax6 may be involved in the neuronal commitment of the spinal cord and induces the expression of Ngn2, a proneuronal gene, in the mouse spinal cord (Scardigli et al., 2001). Robo2 and Sema5a, known as axon guidance molecules (Yue et al., 2006; Kantor et al., 2004), are reported to be regulated by Pax6 function (Jones et al., 2002; Jiménez et al., 2002). Based on these early reports, Pax6NeuroD6 and its downstream signaling seem to have important roles in neurogenic differentiation of the spinal cord. The immunocytochemistry study in the earlier section revealed that there was significant differentiation of the astrocyte on Day 4. But the expression analysis in cluster D showed genes involved in astrocyte differentiation, such as Nkx2.2, BMP, Smad7, and NtrK2, on Day 2 as well as on Day 4. This observation implies the existence of a repression mechanism of astrocyte differentiation in the early stage between Day 2 and Day 4. It was also in agreement with a previous report in which Ngn1 was suggested to inhibit astrocyte differentiation and promote neurogenesis in midgestational NPCs (Sun et al., 2001). Any significant change in expression of Ngn1 was not observed in the experiment, but Neurod6, one of the bHLH factors, showed significantly increased expression in the early stage of differentiation. To confirm whether neurod6 is able to repress astrocyte differentiation, further investigation might be necessary. To verify the expression of genes, including those mentioned in this section, 5 selected genes (Lmo2, Nkx2.2, BMP4, Ncam2, NeuroD6) were subjected to semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis. The expression pattern of each gene was consistent with the results of the microarray (Fig. 4). For a better understanding of the underlying mechanism of spinal cord precursor cell differentiation, a biological interaction network was constructed using the Biomolecular Interaction Network Database (BIND; http://bond. unleashedinformatics. com/) and the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BIOGRID; http:// www.thebiogrid. org/) and visualized with Cytoscape v2.5 open source software (http://www.cytoscape. org). The network obtained from BIND was composed of 2584 edges (interactions) and 2054 nodes (genes), and the network from BIOGRID was composed of 658 interactions and 424 genes. A single subnetwork was constructed initially by mapping both differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and their first neighbors for each time point. Up and downregulated genes were colored in red and green, respectively. Finally, the subnetworks containing 370, 435, and 508 genes were identified for differentiation Day 2, 4, and 8, respectively (Fig. 5). As the key node (gene) among these genes, we identified 2 genes, neuro-oncological ventral antigen'(Nova1) and transforming growth factor beta receptor'(TGFBR1), which interact with more than 9 proteins in the networks. Nova1 is reported to be necessary for the development of the motoneuron and for control of the alternative splicing of pre-mRNA involved in synapse formation and activity (Ratti et al., 2008). Because Nova1 is a neuron-specific splicing factor, the genes in the first neighbors of Nova1 were expected to be downregulated on Day 8, the late stage of neuronal differentiation. However, most of the genes in the first neighbor of Nova1 were upregulated in a time-dependent manner along the differentiation (Fig. 6A) according to the expression analysis. Meanwhile, the expression of 6 genes (Sorcs3, Purg, Phactr1, Fgd4, Nrxn3, and Rap1gds1) in clusters 10 and 12 were found to be slightly decreased on Day 8. The network analysis showed that Nova1 has direct interactions with Pax6, BTB, and CNC homology 2 (Bach2). But Pax6 and Nova1 were filtered out in the process of DEG-finding procedures, when we performed semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for each gene to check the expression level of the genes. As shown in Fig. 4, the expression of Pax6 significantly decreased on Days 4 and 8, and the expression of Nova1 was slightly downregulated on Day 8. The network analysis indicated that Nova1 may play a pivotal role in neuronal development in the spinal cord. The number of upregulated genes that connected with another node (TGFBR1) also increased in a timedependent manner, through the differentiation period (Fig. 6B). This result was correlated with gene expression levels monitored by RTPCR (Fig. 4). Recent studies have shown that TGFbeta1/SMAD signaling induces astrocyte fate commitment of neuronal precursor cells in vitro (Stipursky and Gomes, 2007; de Sampaio e Spohr et al., 2002). These observations imply that TGFBR1 has important roles in the astrogenesis of spinal cord precursor cells. In summary, in order to identify genes involved in regulatory functions of the differentiation process, we analyzed the levels of whole gene expression during the differentiation of spinal cord NPCs. We identified 1878 genes whose expression levels were significantly changed during differentiation and categorized these genes into 12 clusters based on their patterns of expression. Computational analyses on biological function suggested that the Pax6NeuroD6 pathways may be important in the generation of neurons and astrocytes. The interaction network analysis also sheds light on the possible pivotal roles of Nova1 and TGFbeta in neurogenesis and astrogenesis in the mouse spinal cord, respectively. In particular, further molecular studies on Nova1 will be of great help for elucidating the underlying regulation mechanism of neurogenesis/astrogenesis of NPCs. 