
=============제목==========
Genome-Wide Association Studies of the Korea Association REsource (KARE) Consortium.
=============교신저자==========
*Corresponding author: E-mail ohbs@khu.ac.krTel +82-2-961-0617, Fax +82-2-961-5515E-mail: hyung@ewha.ac.krTel +82-2-2650-5727, Fax +82-2-2652-7846Accepted 30 August 2010
===========저자==========
Kyung-Won Hong1, Hyung-Lae Kim2* and Bermseok Oh1*1Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Me-dicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-702, Korea, 2Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 158-710, Korea−5); the re-maining 12 (ARHGEF12, CSMD1, ARSG, SGSM1, GJA8, ALX4, 2q31.1, 15q22.1, LIPC, CSK, 7q21.13, 7q31.1, 10q25.2) were suggestive loci (10−5＜p-value＜10−4). To enhance the original association study, a total of 1,827,004 imputed SNPs were reanalyzed for their asso-ciation with blood pressure in this study. 
===========키워드==========
Keywords: genome-wide association study, KARE, ge-netic risk factorKeywords: blood pressure, genomewide association study, Korea Association Resource, imputation, single nucleo-tide polymorphism
===========소제목==========
Abstract	Main Text	Introduction	Methods	Methods	Methods	Self-Reported Personality Measures	Methods	Particle Swarm Optimization	PSO-based classification system	Methods	
===========소소제목==========
AStudy samples	Study subjects	Subjects 	Molecular Modeling	Model design 	Trio phasing of SNP genotypes based on Men-delian inheritance patterns	
===========본문==========
Abstract.
During the last decade, large community cohorts have been established by the Korea National Institutes of Health (KNIH), and enormous epidemiological and clinical data have been accumulated. Using these information and samples in the cohorts, KNIH set out to do a large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 2007, and the Korea Association REsource (KARE) consortium was launched to analyze the data to identify the underlying genetic risk factors of diseases and diverse health indexes, such as blood pressure, obesity, bone density, and blood biochemical traits. The consortium consisted of 6 research divisions, formed by 25 principal investigators in 19 organizations, including 18 universities, 2 institutes, and 1 company. Each division focused on one of the following subjects: the identification of genetic factors, the statistical analysis of gene-gene interactions, the genetic epidemiology of gene-environment interactions, copy number variation, the bioinformatics related to a GWAS, and a GWAS of nutrigenomics. In this special issue, the study results of the KARE consortium are provided as 9 articles. We hope that this special issue might encourage the genomics community to share data and scientists, including clinicians, to analyze the valuable Korean data of KARE.MMain Text.
Most common diseases are influenced by multiple genetic factors as well as environmental factors. However, each single genetic effect might contribute a small part to the phenotype. Therefore, large sample sizes and genome-wide analysis are necessary to identify multiple genetic factors. Since 2001, the Korea National Institute of Health (KNIH) has established cohorts nationwide and accumulated epidemiological and clinical information on a large scale, up to 300,000 subjects. Using these samples, KNIH set to produce genotype data in 2007 and proceeded to perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS). In order to make the most of the massive phenotype and genotype data set, the extramural research consortium was organized to host scientists interested in these data. The Korea Association REsource (KARE) consortium consists of 6 research divisions, formed by 25 principal investigators in 19 organizations, including 18 universities, 2 institutes, and 1 company. Each division focused on one of following subjects: the identification of genetic factors, the statistical analysis of gene-gene interactions, the genetic epidemiology of gene-environment interactions, copy number variation, bioinformatics related to GWAS, and a GWAS of nutrigenomics.  In this issue, 9 papers were selected from the consortium. Hong et al. (2010) investigated the feasibility of using imputed SNPs for a GWAS with blood pressure traits to determine whether they could improve the previous results that were analyzed without imputation (Cho et al., 2009). Park et al. (2010) performed a GWAS for blood pressure with 3 different phenotype models: young hypertensive cases versus elderly normotensive controls, the upper 25% versus the lower 25% of SBP distribution, and SBP and DBP as continuous traits. Kim et al. (2010c) conducted a GWAS for hematological parameters using copy number variations. Kwon and Kim (2010) analyzed a GWAS for 3 erythrocyte traits, such as hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red blood cells. Doo and Kim (2010) conducted an association study between an ADIPOQ gene SNP (rs182052) and obesity in Korean women. Kim et al. (2010b) compared the Affymetrix SNP array 5.0 and oligoarray platforms for defining copy number variation. Oh et al. (2010) applied a joint identification approach to large-scale GWA data in order to identify genetic variants of obesity for the Korean population. Kim et al. (2010a) applied a structural equation model to a GWAS for the following two purposes: to model a complex relationship between a genetic network and traits as risk factors and to achieve a better understanding of the biological mechanism through not only a single gene but also many genes involved in the pathway of the trait. Kim et al. (2010d) conducted targeted resequencing of loci identified by the KARE GWAS to detect potential casual and/or rare variants for complex traits, such as type 2 diabetes and triglycerides.  During the last 2 years of the consortium, there have been more than 15 meetings and gatherings to present and discuss results of the KARE data analysis. Up to 100 participants were involved in the discussions, establishing a new paradigm of science in genomics in Korea. The events would not have been possible had KNIH decided not to make the valuable data open to the consortium. As members of the consortium, we appreciate the members of the Center for Genome Science in KNIH, the Ansung and Ansan epidemiological cohorts, and DNALink for producing and managing such enormous and valuable resources. Lastly, we hope to apply these investigations to better serve the health of the participants in the cohorts.(p0.05). These results suggest that the imputation method can facilitate the discovery of novel SNPs as well as enhance the fine structure of the association peak in the loci.IIntroduction.
The human genome contains ~10 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), but only a small fraction of them has been assayed using current high-density microarrays, such as Illumina and Affymetrix platforms. To enhance an original association study, the genotypes of untyped SNPs can be imputed based on nearby markers and can be tested for association with phenotypes of interest. This strategy enables researchers to easily replicate and compare previous findings across array types and enables them to test a large number of SNPs to reveal the fine structure of the association peak, facilitating interpretation of the results and the location of causal polymorphisms (Hao et al., 2009). By using the imputed SNPs, Tobin and colleagues identified a significant association of the WNT1 gene with diastolic blood pressure, and Knouff and colleagues identified a significant association between the CETP gene and diastolic blood pressure (Knouff et al., 2008; Tobin et al., 2008).The first genomewide association study for large cohorts in Korea was conducted by the Korea National Institute of Health (KNIH) and reported associations with 8 quantitative traits, including blood pressure (Cho et al., 2009). The Korean GWAS suggested a total of 14 loci for blood pressure, 2 (ATP2B1 and 10 p15.1) of which were significant association loci (p-value10Methods.
Subjects and their genotypes were reported in a previous genomewide association study (Cho et al., 2009). Briefly, subjects came from 2 community-based cohorts, the rural community Ansung and the urban community Ansan, in KyungGi-Do province, near Seoul, Korea. Most DNA samples were isolated from the peripheral blood of participants and genotyped using the Affymetrix Genomewide Human SNP array 5.0 (Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA). After the quality control steps, we finally used estyle factors that are known to cause hypertension include sedentary lifestyle, high stress, high salt intake, and alcohol consumption (Kyrou et al., 2006). Both blood pressure and hypertension are traditional examples of complex traits controlled by the complex interplay of genes and environmental factors (Pickering et al., 1959). The heritability of blood pressure ranges from 31% to 68%, depending on studies based on different measurements of SBP and DBP (Pilia et al., 2006; Tobin et al., 2005).Ehret (2010) summarized the 12 genomewide association studies (GWASs) on blood pressure and hyper-to 59 years who participated in the Korean Genome Epidemiology Study (KoGES). The KoGES were performed as cohorts for chronic disease (diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis, obesity and metabolic syndrome) in adults aged between 40-69, who were recruited from two community-based epidemiology studies in the rural Ansung and urban Ansan commun-lation. We carried out GWAS of CNV for the chosen traits and identified several loci associated with these traits. The loci identified in our study are different from than those reported in a previous GWAS of SNP.Methods.
We collected data from 10,004 individuals in two populations from rural Ansung and urban Ansan cohorts as me Analyzer (GA), Roche/454 FLX system, and ABI SOLiD system, recently have significantly improved throughput and reduced the cost remarkably as compared to capillary-based electrophoresis systems (Shendure et al., 2004). For example, in a single experiment using the Roche/454 FLX, the sequences of approximately 100 million reads of up to 350 bases in length can be determined (Rothberg et al., r detecting CNVs (Baumbusch, 2008; Curtis and Lynch, 2010; Hester et al., 2009), but there has been no report that validated the accuracy and reproducibility of CNVs identified by Affymetrix SNP array 5.0. In this study, we compared the characteristics of CNVs from the same set of genomic DNAs detected by three different array platforms; Affymetrix SNP array 5.0, Agilent 2X244K CNV array and NimbleGen 2.1M CNV array. h substantial changes in three obesity-related phenotypes (Scuteri et al., 2007). Feitosa et al. used BMI and performed a linkage study from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Family Heart Study. They found significant signals near the leptin gene (chromosome 7q32.3) and chromosome 13q14 (Feitosa et al., 2002). Liu et al. identified the CTNNBL1 gene for obesity from US Caucasian and French replication case-control samples. They also confirmed the previously identified associations between obesity and INSIG2 and PFKP (Liu et al., 2008).   Loos et al. performed association studies in chromosomal region 18q21 and reported that common variants near the MC4R gene influence fat mass, weight, and obesity risk (Loos et al., 2008). Thorleifsson et al. con-om complex interactions among multiple genetic factors and environmental factors.   In this study, we applied Structural Equation Models (SEMs) in order to model complex relationships between genetic networks and traits as risk factors (Bollen, 1989). The SEM was originally developed in the field of social science to fit a model with unobserved variables. It is well known that the main advantage of the SEM approach is that it allows us to compare several candidate models. Our application of the SEM to a GWAS enables us to investigate how each risk factor affects a targeted trait directly or through other variables, and SEM is used to represent the relationship among multiple phenotypes. In order to choose the components scriptome data, allowing them to get information such as how different alleles of a gene are expressed, detect post-transcriptional mutations or identify gene fusions. te specificity is determined by allosteric effect due to binding of nucleoside triphosphate to a particular site which is different from the catalytic site. This specific site binding is a property is unique to RNRs (Jordan and Reichard, 1998). The class Ia RNRs also has an activity site which controls the overall activity of the enzyme using ATP regardless of the specificity. Considering the different metallocofactors required by different classes of RNRs it seems that the three classes of RNRs evolved independently.   Despite these differences the similar catalytic mechanism of all the three classes of RNR and presence of d identified total 464 genes whose deletions confer the alteration of sensitivity to rapamycin (Chan et al., 2000; Xie et al., 2005).  Yeast extract-peptone-dextrose (YPD) and synthetic complete (SC) media are commonly used for yeast cultivation, but their compositions are quite different. Recently, it was reported that chronological lifespan in yeast is differentially regulated between YPD and SC media (Lastauskiene and Citavicius, 2008; Weinberger et al., 2010). Taking into account the fact that the activity of TOR signaling pathway is dependent on nutrient availability, it is reasonable to assume that media composition would affect rapamycin sensitivity of cells. While nome may overcome some of this resistance. Second, a multitarget hit strategy seems to benefit cancer therapy. As we dissect critical cell cycle, proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and signaling pathways, we can develop molecules to target them (Bishton et al., 2007). It is clear that in addition to the effect on histone acetylation, non-histone targets are critical for the effects of these drugs. Such targets for hyperacetylation include p53, -tubulin, HIF-1, and HSP90 (Bali et al., 2005; Huang et al., 2002; Kawaguchi et al., 2003; Qian et al., 2006). Finally, the good toxicity profile of these agents make them suitable for combina-s, the association between polymorphism and the risk of lung cancer has not yet been fully clarified.  This study was undertaken to examine the polymorphism of PIK3CA, and its relation with the risk of lung cancer in Korean population. To our best knowledge, this is the first report on the polymorphism of PIK3CA in lung cancer patients in Korean population.Methods.
Between August 2001 and November 2007, blood sam-ge of Medicine, CHA University from January 2000 to August 2003, (Seoul, Korea). Semen analysis was performed with infertile males further sub-divided following semen analysis performed strictly according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines (WHO) (2001). The sub-division n increased risk of IS in the Han Chinese population (Zhang et al., 2010). Kim et al. (2010) suggested that the 399C/T neuropeptide Y (NPY) promoter polymorphism should be considered a genetic risk factor for IS in older adult and female Koreans. Munshi et al. (2010) also suggested that the 344T allele of aldosterone synthase is an important risk factor for hypertension and IS. Shi et al. (2009) showed that the 863C/A SNP of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is associated with an increased risk of idiopathic childhood IS. Reuter et al. (2009) reported the association between the 261G/A of TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 2  (Kattan et al., 1999; Stephenson et al., 2005a), vulvar cancer (Rouzier et al., 2006), osteosarcoma (Kim et al., 2009), renal cancer (Karakiewicz et al., 2007), breast cancer (Rouzier et al., 2005), and advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung cancer (Hoang et al., 2005). Furthermore, nomograms have been shown to be superior to the traditional staging systems in predicting the features of various cancers (Hoang et al., 2005; Karakiewicz et al., 2007; Kattan et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2009; Rouzier et al., 2006; Rouzier et al., 2005; Stephenson et al., 2005a). ependent statistical tests. In order to minimize false positives due to multiple testing, one typically imposes a very stringent cutoff for the statistical significance level. However, it is still imaginable that some false positives slip through the threshold. For example, there are a few orders of magnitude more markers than samples, and some peculiar sampling may cause bias in the population structure, causing spurious associations. In order to overcome such problems, the results from a GWAS are typically reexamined by a replication study employing a dataset from independent cohorts. In general strongly associated signals are well replicated in other rder to model higher-order structures of biological sequences, we need more powerful grammatical systems based on formal language theory, as a biological sequence can be thought of as a richly-expressive language for specifying the structures and processes of life. Searls (1988) initiated pioneering works to view biological sequences cytes, and T lymphocytes (Daugherty et al., 1996; Sallusto et al., 1997; Uguccioni et al., 1997). In the human genome, the gene encoding eotaxin is located on the short arm of chromosome 17 (17q21.1- q21.2), where most of the chemokine genes are clustered, and comprises three exons and two introns. These CC chemokines are known to act as chemoattractants and activate inflammatory leukocytes, especially lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils, as well as some stromal cells (Alam, 1997; Corrigan, 1999). The eotaxin gene family can be divided s et al., 1998). Yoon et al. (2006) constructed an application tool to provide the present large-scale approach for the analysis of GEO microarray data.   Though GEO has abundant practical possibilities, it does not support the standard format or model but its self-structured format. Moreover, it stores the microarray data without distinguishing processed data and raw data. These factors hinder providing a comprehensive biological analysis environment and future integration of summary expression value. In practice, with our data we have found that they also yield somewhat unsatisfactory results. Many genes on the resulting lists have relatively flat, uninteresting profiles, and yet, many genes filtered from the list have relatively structured, interesting profiles. This has motivated us to consider using the PM value in addition to the summary expression value to evaluate the significance of genes.   Table 1 and Table 2 show ANOVA results for two sample genes, 265670_s_at and 249093_at. The p-val-iRNAs studied so far are usually not exactly complementary to their mRNA targets, and seem to inhibit protein synthesis while retaining the stability of the mRNA target (Ambros, 2004). It has been suggested that transcripts may be regulated by multiple miRNAs and an individual miRNA may target numerous transcripts.  MiRNA identification is an essential requirement for understanding the mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation. Consequently the prediction of the potential targets also becomes an essential parameter in the un-ted measures that define personality traits. Then, we summarize the characteristics of the candidate genes for personality traits and investigate gene variants that have been suggested to be associated with personality traits for individuals with behavioral outcomes and other psychiatric disorders. The purpose of this review is to improve our understanding of the genetic basis of personality.Self-Reported Personality Measures.
Modern personality research focuses primarily on personality trait dimensions of variation between individuals who are relatively stable over time and predict behavior in various domains (Verweij et al., 2010). According to the personality theory of Eysenck, there are three broad personality factors, named Neuroticism, Extraversion- teoporotic fractures (e.g., JAG1) (Guo et al., 2011; Kou et al., 2011; Kung et al., 2010).  According to data from a large international consortium involving prominent Eurocentric research groups, previously known common genetic variants have shown conflicting results, with differential genetic effects and limited replication between ethnic populations (Cooper et al., 2008; Ioannidis et al., 2004; Ralston et al., 2006). The European-specific variants remain to be validated in East Asian populations to overcome ethnic differences ip between BMI and body fat are weak in older adults. Methods.
For GWAS, subjects were recruited from Ansung (n=5,018) and Ansan (n=5,020) population-based cohorts, established as part of the Korean Genome Epidemiology Study (KoGES) in 2001. Both were designed to allow longitudinal prospective studies and 2007). Thus, the genetic cause of MA is still unknown. However, the predominant occurrence of MA in males suggests that gene(s) in the X chromosome may play a role in MA (Misra et al., 2005). Thus, in this study, we tested whether genetic variants found in two X-linked neurological candidate genes-androgen receptor (AR) and ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme 1 (UBA1) -are involved in the development of MA in Korean patients. genomic selection practices in dairy cattle has been reported (Cole et al., 2009; Hayes et al., 2009). Genomic selection requires a careful understanding of the level of SNPs in each cattle breed. The SNPs in public databases are not validated, and the level of polymorphisms is unknown for many cattle breeds. Therefore, in this study, we evaluated SNP frequency spectra and the rate of polymorphisms in the Hanwoo and Holstein breeds using the Bovine SNP50 BeadChip genotyping array to facilitate genomic evaluation and selection of the Hanwoo breed.to enable a more detailed analysis.   Chaperones are known to protect the aggregation of misfolded proteins by binding and aiding the recycling of the folding process, especially in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) during protein synthesis. The delineation of correct- and misfolded states by chaperones suggests a conundrum because many more proteins exist than chaperones and related molecules. Complete recognition of a correctly folded structure by a structural protein-protein binding site interaction is almost impossible because one protein might possess numerous structural characters. Accordingly, a possibility exists that the globular character might be the checkpoint of the correct folding in biological organisms. This assumption is supported by the aggregation of misfolded proteins because non-globular proteins tend to bind more tightly  sequencer. Sequence analysis was carried out with the software program DNASTAR (DNASTAR, Inc., USA).Multiple sequence alignment was carried out by using the MEGALIGN program of the DNASTAR package by Clustal method. The PHD secondary structure prediction and prediction-based threading methods (Rost, B. and titutes in Korea. In addition, genomic information was accumulated and collected through several collaborative institutes and public international institutes. The integrated biotechnology database is designed to provide information on the genomes of agricultural crops. This database (http://nabic.naas.go.kr/) has six major  the high complexity, large in amount, and changeable property, we propose a clustering algorithm which uses an algorithm that imitates the ecosystem.Particle Swarm Optimization.
  The Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm (Parsopoulos et al., 2002) that our system uses is a stochastic, population-based computer problem-solving ve both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, it has been proposed that anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), IL10, IL13 and IL4, play a role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance and T2DM. However, the underlying mechanism of their disrupted functions in chronic inflammation in relation to T2DM remains to be defined. Interestingly, there has been a report showing disruption of anti-inflammatory responses in type 2 diabetic model animals, suggesting a role of anti-inflammatory processes in T2DM (O'Connor et al., 2007).rom the Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study (KoGES) which is an ongoing prospective community-based epidemiological study in the communities of Ansung (rural) and Ansan (urban) (Table 1). Details of the KoGES and the methods are described in our previous report (Cho et al., 2006; Cho et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2005; Lim et al., 2006). In brief, eligible subjects (age 40-69 years) were examined in 2001-2002 for demography and epidemiology and then follow up biannually. A total of 3,588 men and that the comparison of target gene expression needs particular internal controls that are suitable in different tissues or different physiological conditions in human and other organisms (Selvey et al., 2001; Vandesompele et al., 2002; Lossos et al., 2003; Filby and Tyler, 2007; Theis et al., 2007; Rho et al., 2010). Among housekeeping genes, GAPDH has been demonstrated to be a good internal control in tumor cell lines (Janssens et al., 2004), while HPRT has been identified as a good reference gene for cancer research when comparing solid tumor tissue samples with normal tissue samples (de Kok et al., 2005; Ohl et al., 2005). Thus, it is recommended that suitable internal controls should be determined for accu-n position and velocity based on these good positions. Globally best positions that affect all particles as well as locally best positions which affect a subset of neighboring particles are remembered. As several iterations continue, the globally best position is updated and the final result gives the best particle position.PSO-based classification system.
The PSO algorithm was used to develop the DNA chip page. The gene view and the condition view show the methylation level of CpG sites for only a selected gene and a selected condition, respectively. And the full view shows the methylation level of CpG sites for all genes and conditions in a single page. Coloring of each cell on an image, which corresponds to a CpG site, is determined by the degree of two properties, coverage and methylation level, which are described by two bars on the left top parts of images in the HTML files. The color intensity represents the level of coverage and the height of the dark represents the de- more individuals who might have a CNV.Methods.
An overview of the program processes is shown in Fig. 1.Phasing amounts to deduce which parental allele has been transmitted. If a parent has a homozygous genotype and thus the same allele, it is immaterial which one has been transmitted. As we know which allele of a child has been transmitted from the homozygous parent, gulator approaches (de Jong, 2002; Hasty et al., 2001). Gene set approaches, such as network modeling, can be utilized when information on the genetic pathway is lacking.  Various studies have contributed to determining gene- gene interactions by constructing gene network models using several statistical approaches (Markou and Singh, 2003a). Some studies have applied computational methods, such as neural network models (Markou and Singh, 2003b; Vohradsky, 2001). Gene network models that are based on statistical and computational approaches have been helpful in detecting the "lines" of gene-gene interactions. However, exploring the biological or functional directions of network lines still remains a challenge, be-Toward these goals, we performed a three- stage analysis. In the first stage, we conducted a genome-wide survey of CNVs in 3,274 healthy Korean participants as part of the Korean Genome Epidemiology Study (KoGES) using the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 platform. Using stringent quality control, we ascertained 2,206 CNVRs. In the second stage, we carried out a logistic regression analysis of CNVs with two hypertension-related traits, BP and BMI. rentiation of embryonic cells (Jho and Malbon, 1997) and apoptosis (Berestetskaya et al., 1998). In the growth factor-induced cell migration, G promotes the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling which is independent of GPCR (Shan et al., 2006). G and Rac-dependent cell migration is mediated by the formation of lamellipodia (Dhanasekaran, 2006) and the polymerization of actin to the leading edge of the cell (Radhika et al., 2004).   G is also involved in patterning of blood vessels by controlling cell movement, shape and cell-cell/cell- matrix interactions of the endothelial cells (Ruppel et al., 