
=============제목==========
The Korean Pharmacogenomic Database at NIFDS: 2008 Update.
=============교신저자==========
*Corresponding author: E-mail mwchung@kfda.go.krTel +82-2-380-1807, Fax +82-2-388-6458Accepted 24 July 2009
===========저자==========
T.S. Kang1, S.W. Woo2, H.J. Park1, S.Y. Han1, M.H. Park1 and M.W. Chung1*1Clinical Research Division, Toxicological Evaluation and Research Department, Korea Food and Drug Admini-stration, Seoul 122-704, Korea, 2Pharmaceutical Mana-gement Division, Korea Food and Drug Administration, Seoul 122-704, Korea
===========키워드==========
Keywords: database, Korean people, pharmacogeno-micsKeywords: bioinformatics, computer-aided design, meta-bolic pathway visualization, systems biologyKeywords: BIRC5, survivin, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hep-atocellular carcinoma (HCC), liver cirrhosis (LC), poly-morphism
===========소제목==========
Abstract	Introduction	Methods	Results	Discussion	Overview of the System	Discussion and Future Direction	References	J2.5dPathway Browser Architecture	Implementation	Features and Results	Discussion	References	Overview of the System	Discussion	References	Introduction	Methods	Results	Introduction	Methods	Methods	Results	Methods	Results and Discussion	Data and processing	Query Tool and User Interface 	Overview and Features of ORF Miner	Discussion	Methods	Methods	Methods	Methods	Methods	Methods	Results and Discussion	Methods	Overview and features of CpG Islands Detector	Methods	Results	Methods 	Methods	
===========소소제목==========
Database Organization	Drug and label information	Quality Assurance	Data field additions	Expanded database size and coverage	AMapping of the trans-splicing ribozyme 	Ribozyme-accessible uridines in mDMPK 3	-UTR RNA	Subjects	Sequence analysis of the human CYP2E1	Genoyping with Fluorescence Polarization Detec-tion	Statistics	Study population and outcomes	Sequence analysis of the human BIRC5	Genotyping with fluorescence polarization detec-tion	Statistics	Yeast strains, medium and reagents	Quantitative proteomic analysis using a multi-label microplate reader	GFP-intensity data processing and analysis	Measuring protein abundance changes induced by rapamycin using a multilabel microplate reader	Comparison of protein abundance changes with mRNA level changes	Functional classification of 37 proteins showing changes in the protein and mRNA level by rapa-mycin	Implementation	AStudy subjects	Sequence analysis of the human SERPINB5	Genotyping with fluorescence polarization de-tection	Subjects and outcomes	Sequencing analysis of ITGB1	Genotyping with fluorescence polarization de-tection	Study samples	Preparation of autism-specific BAC array proto-type	Array-CGH experiment	Copy number analysis	Cell culture 	Radiofrequency (RF) radiation exposure system	RNA extraction and Affymetrix gene chip proc-essing	Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs)	Cell culture 	Radiofrequency (RF) radiation exposure system	Preparation of rat primary hepatocytes	Cell viability assay through MTT assay	Drug treatment and RNA extraction	Analysis of gene expression using DNA micro-array	Micorarray data analysess	Cell viability assay and determination of LC	 for statins	Chemicals	Cell culture 	Cell viability assay	Chemical treatment and RNA extraction	mRNA microarrays	Analysis of microarray expression data	Search criteria and algorithm	G	C % plotting module and graphical user in-terface	Structure of human gap junction 	-2 protein	Homology modeling	Mutational studies	Asp66His	Study subjects	Animals 	Phenotypes	SNP genotyping	
===========본문==========
Abstract.
Since its first release in 2007, the National Institute of Food and Drug Safety Evaluation (NIFDS) has provided pharmacogenomic and comparative information specific to Koreans to allow regulatory reviewers and researchers to adapt their working practices to pharmacogenomics. The highlights of this years additions include "Drug Information", "Gene Information" and "Pharmacogenomic information in the drug labels" sections. These new additions provide information on 737 genes, 719 drugs and pharmacogenomic data of the labels or relabels of 253 approved drugs as of November 2008. The latest version of the Korean Pharmacogenomic Database (KPD, release 2.0) has expanded significantly since its previous release. More SNP and haplotype information has been added to the database with the latest version of the KPD containing approximately four times as many SNPs and haplotypes than the previous version (719 vs. 152, and 30 vs. 7 respectively). Through the "SNP" and "Haplotype" sections, the KPD provides unique Korean SNP and haplotype information as well as comparative information of other populations (Japanese, Chinese, European, African) to offer a range of pharmacogenomic data that can help reviewers and the public understand pharmacogenomic information. The quality and quantity of information in the KPD has also been improved considerably. This data can be found at: http://www.nitr.go.kr/nitr/contents/m134700/view.do/.IIntroduction.
The Internet is an ideal platform for storing, providing and exchanging large-scale genetic information, and there are a large number of web-based bioinformatics sites worldwide. These databases are operated by many organizations for a variety of purposes, and offer huge volumes of information online for public access (Chang Kug Kim 2009; Hongseok Tae 2009; Innocenti 2005; Werner Kalow 2002).  The most well-known pharmacogenomic information database is the Pharmacogenetics and Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB, www.pharmGKB. org), which is the most comprehensive pharmacogenomic information database in the world. The PharmGKB provides information on genotypes, molecular and functional assays, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and clinical outcomes to those involved in pharmacogenomic research (Innocenti 2005).   However, this database contains a wide range of information, and beginners can find it difficult to obtain the required data from this information labyrinth. First-time visiting researchers find it extremely difficult to locate the desired information on the PharmGKB. There are no databases that provide unique Korean information on the SNP and Haplotypes in drug-metabolism-related genes. In addition, there is no information on the relationships between particular SNPs and the drug metabolism, which can be used to identify candidate genes affecting disease progression or drug reactions.  The Korean Pharmacogenomic database (KPD) was developed to allow easier searches for Korean Pharmacogenomic information (Tae Sun Kang et al., 2008), and is located at the National Institute of Food and Drug Safety Evaluation (NIFDS) homepage. When the KPD was first released in 2007, it offered the selected and specialized data (mainly SNP and haplotype information in liver metabolizing enzymes, trasporters and receptors). For the convenience of the public, researchers and scientific reviewer, link functions to major intermational databases (NCBI, dbSNP database, and PharmGKB) were established in the KPD.  Since its first release, the KPD has been used in a wide range of applications including drug evaluations, selection of SNPs in Koreans and general pharmacogenomic education. The KPD is being updated con-tinuously to provide more practical pharmacogenomic information for drug evaluations. This paper reports these developments as well as the many additions and improvements appearing in the latest version of the KPD (release 2.0)Methods.
Oracle 10g was used for database management system and the interface between database and web was implemented on JAVA/JSP. Details related to the genotype information, linkage disequilibrium blocks, haplotype structures and database organization on the KPD have been described previously (Tae Sun Kang et al., 2008). Drug and pharmacogenomic information in drug label were obtained from the Physicians Desk Reference (2007) for the U.S.A, the National Health Service homepage (http://emc.medicines.org.uk/) for the U.K, Drugs in Japan (2007) for Japan and DIMS and EZDRUG for Korea respectively.For completeness of the database, each data used in the KPD is entered or prepared by one menber of the clinical research division in NIFDS and separately validated by second member of the clinical research division. Additional spot checks are routinely performed on each entry by senior members of the review group, including two phamacists, a statistician and a PhD-level genetist.Results.
The KPD was developed to collect genetic information unique to the Korean population, and to allow easy information searches within the numerous databases available. It is also expected to act as a bridge that facilitates easier information gathering through links to larger databases that provide more precise information. With the increasing need to provide more practical information to evaluate drugs as well as educate scientific reviewers and the public, three new data field additions have been added and database size and coverage has been expanded.As shown in Table 1, the KPD has three new additions. Gene Information sectionThe Gene information section was established to provide information on genes, such as those encoding the major drug-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, and receptors, which can affect the drug response (adverse effects and efficacy), based on the SNPs provided in the "SNP information" section. A total of 737 genes are arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant genes is recorded next to each entry. This section also offers detailed information on the summary, key pathways, drug and substrates, important variants and important haplotypes of each gene (Fig. 1). For those who require more specialized information on each gene, quality information is provided by links to the PharmGKB database (www.pharmGKB. org), the UCSC Genome Bioinformatics (http://genome. ucsc.edu) and the OMIM at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=omim) sites.Drug Information sectionThe "Drug Information" section was established to provide drug information, based on the drugs provided in the "Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels" section. A total of 592 drugs have been arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant drugs is recorded next to each entry. This section also offers detailed information on the molecular weight, indications, mechanisms of action, absorption data, distribution data, protein binding data, biotransformation data, half life, elimination data, adverse effects and interactions of each drug (Fig. 1). Those requiring more specialized information on each drug can obtain it via links to the PharmGKB database (www. pharmGKB.org/) site.Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels sectionThe "Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels" section was established to provide information on the use of pharmacogenomic data in drug labels and relabels in Korea and foreign countries. A total of 253 approved drugs have been arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant drugs is recorded next to each entry. This section allows detailed use of the pharmacogenomic data listed in the Physicians' Desk Reference. Through Valid Biomarker (V.B.) information, pharmacogenomic data in the drug labels and relabels in Korea can be compared with those of other regulations (the U.S.A, the U.K and Japan) (Fig. 1).Table 1 shows a detailed comparison of KPD release 1.0 with KPD release 2.0. The latest release of the KPD has detailed information on the SNPs of a total of 719 genes. Comparisons of the SNP frequencies in the Korean population with those of other races registered in the International HapMap database (Europeans, Chinese, Japanese, and African) are also provided.   The "haplotype information" section has been also updated to provide information on 10 unique Korean haplotypes. Korean linkage disequilibrium block data for the genes encoding the major metabolic-enzymes is included. The blocks comprise the SNPs with minor allele frequency (MAF) values 5% using the Gabriel method in the Haploview 3.32 program (Ardlie, Kruglyak and Seielstad 2002; Barrett, Fry, Maller and Daly 2005). The haplotype frequencies of the major liver metabolic-enzymes for the Korean population can be compared with those of other races registered in the International HapMap (Europeans, Chinese, Japanese, and African). In addition, the latest version contains approximately four times as much pharmacogenomic information as the previous release (30 versus 7) through the "Pharmacogenomic Information and Education" facility within the KPD.Discussion.
NIFDS has been operating the KPD with the main aim of offering users a “bridging” function to simplify the search for useful information. The KPD has systematically collected and maintained unique Korean pharmacogenomic information from literatures and other databases and provided scientic reviewers and researchers with the selected data. Since its first release, the KPD has provided data on Korean single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes. It also allows a comparison of the Korean SNP and haplotype frequencies with those of the other ethnic groups registered in the International HapMap (Thorisson, Smith, Krishnan and Stein 2005). The KPD is focused primarily on providing the detailed pharmacogenomic data needed to facilitate drug evaluation. Therefore, in the latest version, three new additions ("Gene Information" section, "Drug Information" section and "Pharmacogenomic information in the drug labels" section) were established, and the data coverage and database linkages were expanded to provide more practical pharmacogenomic information for drug evaluations. These new additions provide scientific reviewers and the general public with the concise information needed to understand ethnic differences and evaluate bridging studies. It is also expected to be useful for finding unique Korean Pharmacogenomic data without the need to search other databases. The KPD contains extensive links to almost all major bioinformatics and pharmacogenomic databases (the dbSNP and OMIM at NCBI, PharmGKB and UCSC sites) (Karolchik et al., 2008; Kuhn et al., 2007; Kuhn et al., 2009; Wheeler et al., 2008). Through these links, the KPD provides convenient search functions to obtain more precise information with just a single mouse click.What is the most important thing is to update the database with the lastst pharcogenomic data on a constant basis in order to maintain the KPD effectively. Local expert organizations and networks are needed to guarantee the reliability of the pharmacogenomic information contained in the database. In order to ensure that the KPD is used effectively by scientific reviewers and the general public, the types of visitors to the site must be assessed and the database must be upgraded periodically to reflect the demands of the major visiting population. Overall, it is expected that the KPD will serve as a useful resource to both scientific reviewers and the general public.system or the source code for possible collaboration.OOverview of the System.
CAD (Computer-Aided Design) has been traditionally used to assist in modeling in various fields, and advances in the biological community have created new uses for CAD with many novel biomedical applications (Demir et al., 2002; Holford et al., 2005; Sorokin et al., 2006; Sun, 2005). Especially, CAD can be a visualization gateway to gather numerous biological pathway resources, not only from biological pathway databases but also from static images and research articles.  The PPE (Pyrus Pathway Editor) system, a Java- based visual tool for drawing and annotating biological pathways, is described in this paper. It is a graphical editor for biological pathways, and it integrates the pathway image and XML file source. Fig. 1 shows a snapshot of the PPE system.  The PPE window contains a menu bar, tool bar, status bar, and a progress bar at the top of the screen. Windows can be dragged around the screen and resized. The tool bar contains tools for making selections, for zooming and scrolling images, and for changing the drawing color. The status bar, when the cursor is over an image, displays pixel coordinates and values. The progress bar shows the progress of time- consuming operations. PPE provides several common visual notations but also allows the user to define his own notations. The shape menu in the left window, in Fig. 1, can be used to select the shapes of the biological nodes. Users can annotate map elements with biological information or link them to external databases. The File/Import submenu provides access to plug-ins for reading XML files and for loading images. Thus, maps can be drawn in several modes.  First, they can be imported from external XML file sources and laid out in the editor window, as in Fig. 1. In the case that layout information is not provided in the XML file, an automatic layout module will be applied to display biological pathways.  Second, it allows a user to import external image sources, process the image, convert the processed image into an XML format, and finally generate maps in the editor window. The File/Open command opens TIFF, GIF, and JPEG images. There are some excellent image sources, ranging from image pathway databases, such as KEGG (http://www.kegg.org/) and BioCARTA (http:// www.biocarta.com), to images in numerous biological textbooks, research papers, and websites. These external images are initially displayed in additional windows below the main editing window, as in Fig. 2a. They will be semiautomatically processed, converted into an XML format, and displayed in the main editing window, as in Fig. 2b. Each node and edge in the original image has to be confirmed by a user, one by one; double-clicking on any line or image nodes in the bottom window will result in the Object in the editor window. By selecting an appropriate node type from the pop-up window, the user can create a new object in the main window. The types and shapes of nodes are predefined. The node types include protein-node, chemical compound-node, DNA-node, RNA-node, enzyme- node, and others. In addition, users can define their own node type. By selecting the exact concept from the pop-up menu, the user can specify an  appropriate edge type, too.Discussion and Future Direction.
KEGG and BioCARTA visualize pathways in a static way. Pathway diagrams are manually drawn and stored as bitmap image files. While this visualization style offers good pathway representation, it does not provide the facilities to create and visualize dynamic pathways. Fortunately, KEGG also provides XML files. In the case that layout information is not provided in the XML file, an automatic layout module will be applied to display biological pathways. However, there are cases in which XML files are not provided in many other databases. In this case, we have to convert an image file directly to an XML file.  In this paper, a computer-aided approach to modify biological pathways, both in image and XML file format, is presented. To the best of our knowledge, we have not found any attempt to process biological pathway images within the CAD environment. However, there are some thorny issues that need to be solved to fully automate this process. Especially, an optical character recognition module should be added in the future to recognize characters in the image. Currently, the characters in the original images are filtered out, and the names and types of each node are manually annotated by humans in a later process, as in Fig. 3. Once the characters can be recognized, the naming process of each node, by human intervention, can be fully automated in the majority of cases.References.
The pathway editor: a tool for managing complex biological networks. IBM J. Res. Dev. 50, 561-573. 3D space offers less constraints on the topology and helps to avoid such unaesthetic graph elements as line crossing. The extra dimension gives greater flexibility for placing nodes and edges in the network.   Despite all these merits, only a few tools offer three-dimensional visualizations. The problem is that, the resultant 3D images of computer graphics are rendered in a 2D media. Therefore, making use of higher dimensions is rather difficult for users generally viewing the network on a two-dimensional screen.  An alternative approach to three-dimensional graph visualization would be to present only interesting subtrees in different layers, originated from the basic 2D graph visualization. This scheme helps when there is a possibility to group multiple nodes to a hyper-node to reduce complexity as well as to hide nodes that are not of interest.   This paper presents a visual Java-based tool for drawing and annotating biological pathways in two- and-a-half-dimensions (2.5D) as an alternative to the existing two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) presentations, where two and a half dimension is an informal term used to describe visual phenomena which is actually 2D with 3D looking graphics (Baur et al., 2004; Song et al., 2009). Such visualization allows user to see a detailed view of an objects in focus and its place in the context of the whole system.J2.5dPathway Browser Architecture.
The J2.5DPathway Browser Tool is a tool that hierarchically lists the pathways and super nodes. The system provides a visual interface to biomedical pathways. It is basically a graph visualization tool. An XML-format input data may come from web services (e.g., KEGG: http:// www.genome.jp/kegg/soap/) after the user chooses to view the selected pathway from the J2.5DPathway, or it may come from other file formats, which were locally saved.   J2.5DPathway consists of four major modules: (1) graphical user interface (GUI), (2) two-dimensional representation, (3) two-and-a-half dimensional representation, and (4) layout optimizer. The layout optimizer module permits user to optimize the appearance of a graph. Implemented data structures are based on an ontology model designed specifically for metabolic pathways.  The GUI module comprises of a set of tools for facilitating interaction between the system and the user (see Fig. 2). The screen of J2.5dPathway system consists of Views. The tool-bar menu at the top lists various tool icons. Most of the functions of the tool icons are self-explanatory. For example, clicking the Magnifying Glass tool manipulates the View to zoom in or out. Pathways will be initially displayed in the main window in the middle. Below the main window, a table lists all the nodes in the pathways. The interested nodes can be selected, by clicking the elements in the table. To allow user to view several different groups of nodes, selected nodes will be displayed in different parallel planes, however with interdependent layouts. In the case user wants to create a new plane, he or she may set the plane number to a value greater than one.  Alternatively, a feature of selecting nodes of interest is also available by clicking and dragging a rectangular or circular area on the 2D plane. This is possible because J2.5dPathway is an extended version of J2dPathway (Song et al., 2008).  J2dPathway has a feature to select arbitrary nodes and abstracts them into a single node. One can select several nodes by dragging the mouse and turn them into a single super node. These abstracted nodes are displayed in a different plane, in a consequent process.   For example, the selected nodes (the red nodes) in Fig. 3 are abstracted into a single super node (Song et al., 2008) in J2dPathway environment. However, the selected nodes in the original 2D visualization are displayed in a different plane in J2.5dPathway environment. The transformed two-and-a-half dimensional representation and the original two dimensional representations are basically consistent with each other.Implementation.
Our application was developed based on Java 3D classes and methods, importing from javax.media.j3d (see Fig. 4). It is implemented based on Java 3D API (http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/desktop/java3d/) and OpenGL (http://www.opengl.org/about/overview/) technologies, the premier environment for developing portable, interactive 3D graphics applications. To run the J2.5dPathway system, the graph library yFiles should be also installed on user’s local computer (Wiese et al., 2000). local database features for saving and searching the searched results. Users can import and update the major databases with Windows interfaces and can manipulate their own local databases with searched results.Features and Results.
The detailed features of WinBioDBs are as follows.  Windows program   supporting the search of 10 major biological databases (Table 1) including large databases like GenBank  searching and formatting the results  local databases for the searched results  editing and searching local databases  customization of search conditions for each database  customization of output fields for each database  project features - multiple local databases  updating public DB  backup of local databases  The database schema of WinBioDBs is a little complicated (Fig. 1) to support the complicated features (Fig. 2). Database information table is a meta table and each of 10 major public databases constructs a public DB table and a private DB table.Discussion.
WinBioDB is a Windows program with diverse and unique features as a PC-based program. With more practical requirements through user tests, it will be upgraded to a more useful database program. It could include more public databases and could be integrated with analysis programs.  As WinBioDBs use MySQL as its database engine, the server version programs can be easily constructed by just changing the database server while using its Windows interfaces.References.
 The protein information resource (PIR). Nucl. Acids Res. 28, 41-44. The Pfam Protein Families Database. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, D138-D141. GenBank: update. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, 23-26.Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, D134-D137. have been developed for primer design and probe design. Some programs such as PCR Suite (van Baren, 2004) and BatchPrimer3 (You, 2004) provide user-friendly Primer3 interfaces including web-based environment. Some programs have been developed for designing very specific primers (Moro, 2009). iCODEHOP (Boyce, 2009) uses multialignment result from ClustalW. Genomemasker (Andreson, 2006) and UniPrime (Boutros, 2009) treat genome sequences for primer design.  We have developed COCAW (Comparative Observer for Conserved Areas among Whole genomes), which has web interfaces for the input of multiple genomes and the output of graphical display of detected conserved regions.Overview of the System.
Fig.1 shows the general algorithm of COCAW. Common k-mer patterns are detected in genomes as seed patterns for finding out the candidates of conserved pair regions. To select comparison regions instead of com-paring whole genomes, the information entropy for each k-mer is calculated against whole genomes. After selecting the regions to be compared based on the information entropy, local alignment is calculated to detect final conserved pair regions.  Fig. 2 shows the main web interface of COCAW. Inputs are (a)(d) including a reference genome, compared genomes, the comparison range of the reference genome, and tolerance value of the information entropy comparison. And the detected conserved regions are displayed at (e)(f). The right shot shows an example of the summary of the searched result, where one genome has a similar region with the reference genome and no similar regions are found between the reference genome and other genomes.  Fig. 3 shows the running time analysis of COCAW. X-axis indicates the number of genomes and Y-axis indicates the running time. And multiple plots for error cutoffs of information entropy are displayed. While the running time increases rapidly by the number of compared genomes, it is still very practical for conserved region analysis of species and genus.Discussion.
COCAW is a tool for scanning multiple genomes for conserved regions and it could be useful for genome-wide detection of the patterns as probes among a group of genomes. Currently it shows the detected conserved regions with a little graphical interface, and it will be upgraded for more practical and informational interface especially for multiple genome processing.  COCAW finds out conserved regions among multiple genomes. As a group-specific pattern is an exclusively conserved region, it is not only conserved in the group but also should not be in other genomes. So for detecting very strict group specific patterns, more complicated and time-consuming processes are additionally required.  More practical algorithms should be developed for massive number of genomes with practical user interfaces for diverse applications.References.
. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 3389-3402.. New design strategy for development of specific primer sets for PCR-based detection of Chlorophyceae and Bacillariophyceae in environmental samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75, 5729-5733.tional to the number of the expanded CTG repeats. The number of repeats is in the range of 5-35 in the normal population, and DM alleles harbor more than 50 and up to several thousand repeats in DM1 patients. The pathogenesis of DM1 is directly mediated by a toxic mDMPK RNA that is entrapped in the affected cell nucleus. A number of pieces of evidence suggest that pleiotropic effects of aberrant interactions between the mDMPK transcripts that are retained in the nucleus and RNA- binding proteins, such as muscleblind-like 1, change the metabolism of target mRNAs, including splicing (Wheeler, 2008). Additively, decreased DMPK protein levels in DM1 patients due to loss of cytoplasm-localized mRNA for translation could cause physiological and functional alterations in phosphorylation of target proteins, including CUG-binding protein 1, and hence has been suggested as a contributor to the pathology of the disease (Kaliman and Llagostera, 2008).   There is no cure for DM yet. However, several approaches to reduce the mutant RNA-mediated toxicity through elimination of nucleus-trapped toxic mDMPK transcripts have been proposed as specific therapies for reversal of the disease phenotype. They include approaches with antisense, small catalytic RNA, or siRNA, which can reduce the level of mDMPK RNA by directly targeting the expanded CUG repeats of the mDMPK transcript (Furling et al., 2003; Krol et al., 2007; Langlois et al., 2003; Mahadevan et al., 2006). However, high specificity for degradation of the mutant alleles, nontoxicity, and lack of off-target effects will be required to minimize nonspecific reduction of the normal allele and cellular toxicity. RNA repair or RNA replacement has been described as a new approach to human gene therapy against genetic disorders, which relies on the Tetrahymena group I-based trans-splicing ribozyme (Sullenger and Gilboa, 2002). This ribozyme could cleave a target 5-exon RNA and trans-ligate an exon that is tagged at its 3-end onto the cleaved target RNA both in vitro and in bacteria and mammalian cells (Been and Cech, 1986; Sullenger and Cech, 1994; Jones et al., 2006). Therefore, the trans-splicing ribozyme can reduce the level of a specific target RNA and simultaneously induce transgene activity specifically in the target RNA- expressing cells. Indeed, trans-splicing ribozymes have been successfully developed to replace mutant transcripts that are associated with several human genetically inherited diseases, including DM1 (Lan et al., 1998; Phylactou et al. 1998; Rogers et al., 2002). Moreover, we have shown that trans-splicing ribozyme targeting and replacing the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) RNA could specifically and efficiently regress human tumors not only in cell cultures but also in animals without any toxicity in normal tissues or any off-target splicing effects (Hong et al., 2008; Jeong et al., 2008; Kwon et al., 2005; Song and Lee, 2008; Song et al., 2009). Thus, a trans-splicing ribozyme that can repair toxic mDMPK RNA with the wild-type one or replace the nucleus-entrapped mutant transcripts with RNA that can be released into the cytoplasm would be a potential tool for DM1 treatment. To this end, we have developed mDMPK 3-UTR-specific trans-splicing ribozymes by utilizing an RNA mapping procedure that identifies the most accessible ribozyme sites.  Any uridine (U) residue in a target RNA can be targeted for splicing by the trans-splicing ribozyme through alteration of the internal guide sequence (IGS), which is the 5-exon binding site of the ribozyme, to make it complementary to the target sequence (Long et al., 2003; Sullenger, 1995). However, the ribozyme can actually access only a limited number of uridines on the target RNA due to complicated tertiary structure formation of the substrate RNA (Lan et al., 2000). To develop most potential mDMPK 3-UTR-specific ribozymes, therefore, identification of the regions of the target transcript that are accessible to ribozymes should be performed first. To this end, we employed an RNA mapping strategy based on RNA tagging (Jones et al.,1996) and a trans- splicing ribozyme library, which has been described in detail elsewhere (Fig. 1) (Lan et al., 1998; Lan et al., 2000; Kwon et al., 2005; Ryu et al., 2003; Song and Lee, 2007).  We constructed the GN5 ribozyme library, which is based on the Tetrahymena group I intron and contains a randomized IGS. Ribozymes in the GN5 library can bind to the substrate RNA, cleave at any accessible U residue, and transfer a 3-exon that is tagged onto the ribozyme to the end of the cleaved 5-target product. We used a portion of the lacZ gene as a 3-exon molecular tag in the GN5 library. mDMPK 3-UTR RNA was synthesized using in vitro transcription of PCR-amplified vector encoding the mDMPK 3-UTR gene with 200 CTG repeats (kindly supplied by Dr. Leonidas Phylactou at the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics). In order to map the mDMPK 3-UTR RNA, GN5 library RNA (10 nM) was incubated at 37C for 3 hrs under splicing conditions (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl) in the presence of guanosine (200 M) and in vitro-generated target RNA (100 nM). The trans-splicing reaction products were then reverse-transcribed at 37C for 30 min in the presence of argininamide (10 mM) with a 3primer that was specific for the ribozymes 3-exon lacZ sequence (5-ATGTGCTGCAAG GCGATT-3) (Jones et al. 1996). Produced cDNAs were amplified by PCR for 30 cycles using the same 3primer and a 5primer that was specific for the 5-end of the target RNA (5-ACCCTAGAACTGTCTTCGACTCC-3) or downstream region of the expanded CTG sequence (5-GGAATTCGGGGGATCACAGACCAT-3). The amplified trans- splicing products were then cloned into the pUC19 vector, and sequences of several clones were determined.’  When we analyzed sequences of the splicing junction sites of the trans-spliced products amplified with the 5-end of the target RNA as the 5 primer, several uridines, only in the upstream of the expanded trinucleotide repeat sequence, appeared to be particularly accessible (Fig. 2). Long hairpin structures of the expanded trinucleotide repeat might hamper PCR amplification of trans-spliced products that result from the splicing reaction with U residues downstream of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. To identify accessible U residues in the target RNA that were present downstream of the trinucleotide repeat, we also amplified trans-splicing products with the 5primer that was specific for right downstream part of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. Then, several uridines downstream of the expanded CUG repeat sequence were also shown to be particularly accessible. In conclusion, the most accessible site upstream of the CUG repeat sequence was located in the uridine at position 99 of the mDMPK 3-UTR RNA. In addition, the uridine at position 854 of the target RNA was the most accessible site that was present downstream of the CUG repeat. Interestingly, most of the accessible sites, including positions 99 and 854, which were identified using this mapping method, were generally present in the loop or bulge region of the RNAs secondary structure, as predicted by a computer program (Fig. 2). In contrast, no accessible sites were found in the long hairpin-formed CUG repeat region. In previous studies, we showed that the relative trans-splicing reaction efficacy at different sites in a target RNA in cells and in vitro was closely associated with the predicted accessibility determined by mapping results (Ryu et al., 2003; Ryu and Lee, 2004; Kwon et al., 2005). Therefore, the ribozymes that target the ac-), chronic hepatitis (CH), liver cirrhosis (LC), polymorphismIntroduction.
The infection of hepatitis virus B (HBV) is considered as an important health problem worldwide with an estimation of 350 million people chronically infected with the disease (Lavanchy, 2005). Although hepatic complications do not develop in most chronic hepatitis B carriers, 15% to 40% will develop liver cirrhosis (LC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which come with serious sequelae during their lifetime (Bosch et al., 2005).  Continuous consumption of more than 80g of ethanol everyday for a period longer than 10 years increases the risk of HCC by approximately fivefold; however, consumption of less than 80g of alcohol per day does not significantly increases the risk of HCC (Morgan et al., 2004). Although the development of alcohol related to HCC involves several factors including the presence of cirrhosis, oxidative stress, disturbed DNA methylation, and defective retinoic acid signaling, the precise mechanisms on how alcohol causes HCC at a molecular level are just beginning to emerge (Seitz & Stickel 2007; Stickel et al., 2002). According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, ethanol is classified as a human carcinogen because it induces HCC in animals and increases the risk for developing HCC in humans (Baan et al., 2007; Seitz and Stickel 2007).  Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily is important for the metabolic activation of many low-molecular-weight toxicants such as N-nitrosamines, aniline, vinyl chloride, urethane and alcohol (Guengerich et al., 1991). The participation of CYP2E1 in the ethanol metabolizing process is less important than alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). However, continuous ethanol consumption is known to increase the activity of CYP2E1 up to 20 fold, a major constituent of the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system in the liver (Stickel & Osterreicher 2006; Takahashi et al., 1993). Therefore, alcohol’s metabolizing capacity is increased in heavy drinkers. Moreover, CYP2E1 often catalyze the metabolic activation of various procarcinogens to eventual carcinogens (Guengerich et al., 1991; Koop, 1992).  Genetic variation appears to contribute to interindividual variation in CYP2E1 expression levels and activities (McCarver et al., 1998). Specifically, RsaI polymorphism (CYP2E1*5B) (rs2031920) has been associated with decreased CYP2E1 activity or inducibility (Hayashi et al., 1991; Lucas et al., 1995; Marchand et al., 1999; Watanabe et al., 1994). Functional CYP2E1 polymorphisms might therefore influence on susceptibility to cancer development. In one study, common genotypes were associated with risk of HCC (Yu et al., 1995). On the other hand, increased risk of HCC was observed with the rare genotype carriers in another study (Ladero et al., 1996). These studies suggest that variation of CYP2E1 can influence individuals risk of HCC.  Based on these studies, we have formed a hypothesis that polymorphisms of CYP2E1 can affect HCC progression among HBV-infected patients and therefore performed a screening of CYP2E1 to examine its genetic association with HBV clearance and HCC progression.Methods.
A total number of 1,092 Korean subjects having either present or past evidence of HBV infection were prospectively enrolled from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit or from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital from January 2001 to August 2003. All the study subjects were of Korean ethnicity. Subjects were classified into two different groups: CC (chronic carrier) and SR (spontaneously recovered), according to serological markers. The CC and SR cohorts consisted of 658 and 434 subjects, respectively, and the CC cohort was composed of 338 CH/LC and 320 HCC patients (Table 1). The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) over a six-month period, and for both anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively. We excluded subjects that were positive only for anti-HBs and not for anti-HBc, and those positive for anti-HCV or anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin-shi, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). Subjects whose average alcohol consumption assessed by interview was 510 g/day or average cigarette smoking was 1 pack/day were excluded. Patients who had any other types of liver diseases such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, biliary cirrhosis and Budd-Chiari syndrome were also excluded. No patients in our study had a previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment.  Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. All the patients in the CC group had been on regular medical follow-up and had been evaluated with serum alpha-fetoprotein level assessment, abdominal ultrasonography, and/or 2-phase spiral liver CT scan more than twice a year to detect early stages of HCC. We also performed abdominal MRI, bone scan, chest CT, brain MRI, brain CT, hepatic angiography or PET scan in some patients according to the clinical decisions. Liver cirrhosis was diagnosed pathologically or by the clinical evidences of portal hypertension such as visible collateral vessels on the abdominal wall, esophageal varices on esophagogastroscopy, palpable splenomegaly and sonographically definite findings of cirrhotic liver or ascites. HCC was diagnosed as described previously (the age of onset was determined by the date of the diagnosis.) (Bruix et al., 2001).We have sequenced exons, including exon-intron boundaries and their flanking regions, including the promoter region (1.5 kb) to discover polymorphisms in 24 Korean unregulated individual DNA samples using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Primer sets for the amplification and sequencing analysis of CYP2E1 were designed based on GenBank sequences (Ref. Genome seq.; NT_008818.16). Sequence variants were verified by chromatograms.For genotyping of polymorphic sites in our HBV study, amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (Livak, 1999). One allelic probe was labeled with the FAM dye and the other with the fluorescent VIC dye for TaqMan probes. Information regarding the primers is attached in Table 2. Primer Express (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) was used to design the MGB TaqMan probes. PCRs were run in a TaqMan Universal Master Mix without UNG (Applied Biosystems), with PCR primer concentrations of 900 nM and TaqMan MGB-probe concentrations of 200 nM. Reactions were performed in a 384-well format in a total reaction volume of 5 ml using 20 ng of genomic DNA. The plates were then placed in a thermal cycler (PE 9700, Applied Biosystems) and heated at 50C for 2 min and 95C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95C for 15 s and 60C for 1 min with a final soak at 25C. The TaqMan assay plates were transferred to the Prism 7900HT instrument (Applied Biosystems) where the fluorescence intensity in each well of the plate was read. Fluorescence data files from each plate were analyzed by automated allele-calling software (SDS 2.1).We searched for a spine of strong |D| and LD coefficient r between all pairs of biallelic loci (Hedrick & Kumar, 2001). Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was inferred using the algorithm developed by the Broad Institute(using the program Haploview) (Barrett et al., 2005). Haplotypes of each individual were inferred using the algorithm (PHASE, version 2.0) developed by Stephens et al. (Stephens et al., 2001). Subjects harboring missing genotypes were omitted in the analysis of individual single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes. The genotyping success rate was 99%, so it is unlikely that omitting a small number of individuals introduced any bias in the analysis. For analysis of viral clearance as an outcome, logistic regression models were used for calculating odds ratios (95% confidential interval) and corresponding p-values controlling for age (continuous value) and sex (male=0, female=1) as covariates. HBV genotypes, HBV DNA and Alanine transaminase (ALT) levels have been regarded as important factors influencing HBV clearance and the development of HCC. However, HBV genotype C is predominant among CCs of the virus in Korea (Bae et al., 2005; Odgerel et al., 2003; Song et al., 2005a; Song et al., 2005b; Yoo et al., 2003), and the HBV DNA and ALT levels were found to be fluctuating during the follow-up for the majority of our HBV cohort. Therefore, logistic models for HBV clearance were adjusted only for age and sex. Statistical power is calculated with PGA (Power for Genetic Association Analyses) matlab application (http://dceg.cancer.gov/bb/tools/pga) (Menashe et al., 2008). PGA is an application specifically designed to calculate statistical power and other values of case-control genetic association studies. For the present study, a co-dominant (1df) model with relative risk 1.3, disease prevalence value 7.1% (Lee et al., 1998), EDF (Effective Degree of Freedom) 2, and alpha error level 5% were used to calculate the statistical power of p-values for HBV clearance and HCC occurrence.Results.
In this study, we examined the association of CYP2E1 polymorphisms with persistent HBV infection and HCC occurrence. By direct sequencing of 24 individuals, we identified 19 sequence variants in the CYP2E1: 8 in the promoter, 3 in coding regions of exons (two non-synon-useful to future studies.IIntroduction.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, one of the most common virus infections among humans, is the major cause of acute and chronic liver diseases (Lin and Kao, 2008). It affects approximately 350 million people every year, especially those in Asia, Africa, Southern Europe, and Latin America (Lok and McMahon, 2007).  The clinical courses of HBV infection are diverse, ranging from spontaneous recovery after hepatitis to a chronic infection. The risk of developing liver cirrhosis (LC) or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is higher for those who happen to be HBV chronic carriers as compared to the uninfected ones (Merican, Guan et al. 2000). Several previous studies on HBV infection have reported that polymorphisms were associated with the risk of HCC and/or clearance of HBV (Kida et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2006; Park et al., 2006; Shin et al., 2003).  BIRC5 (baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis repeat-contaning 5), also known as survivin, is a protein encoded by the BIRC5 (Altieri 1994a; Altieri 1994b). It belongs to the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) gene family. The BIRC5 protein functions to inhibit caspase activation, thus leading to a decrease in apoptosis or programmed cell death. This has been shown by increase in apoptosis and decrease in tumor growth by disruption of BIRC5 induction pathways. In addition, the BIRC5 protein is highly expressed in most tumor cells (Sah et al., 2006). Because of this, BIRC5 is considered as one of the potent target for cancer therapy (Altieri, 2003).  A previous study demonstrates that BIRC5 is associated with microtubules of the mitotic spindle at the start of mitosis through the disruption of microtubule formation after BIRC5 protein in cancer cells are knocked out. This appearance leads to polyploidy as well as massive apoptosis (Castedo et al., 2004). Another study involves how the BIRC5 depleted cells exit mitosis without achieving proper chromosome alignment and then reforms single tetraploid nuclei. It suggests that BIRC5 protein is needed for sustaining mitotic arrest upon encounter with mitosis problems. The previous studies im-plicate that BIRC5 protein plays an important regulatory role both in the progression of mitosis and sustaining mitotic arrest (Castedo et al., 2004).  Based on those observations in cancer development, we hypothesized that BIRC5 polymorphisms may affect the function of BIRC5 protein and influence the clearance of HBV and HCC progression among HBV-infected patients thus, conducting a case-control study on the BIRC5 gene.Methods.
A total of 1,066 Korean subjects having either present or past evidences of HBV infection were enrolled from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit or from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital. Subjects were divided into two different groups according to serologic markers: the chronic carrier (CC) group, and the spontaneous recovery (SR) group. The CC and SR cohorts consisted of 632 and 434 subjects, respectively (Table 1). The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) over a 6-month period, and for both anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively. Asymptomatic HBV carriers, which usually involve patients with inactive liver disease on liver biopsy, were also included the in CC group. However, it has been known that, HBV continues to replicate, albeit at very low levels, in some patients that have residual liver disease, which in most cases leads to the development of HCC. We excluded subjects who were positive for anti-HBs but not for anti-HBc, as well as those positive for anti-HCV or anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin-shi, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). Patients who had any other types of liver diseases such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and Budd-Chiari syndrome were also excluded from the study. None of the patients had any previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment. Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. The clinical parameters are summarized in Table 1.Using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), we sequenced exons, introns, and the promoter region (1.5) to discover variants from 24 unrelated individual’s DNA samples. Primer sets for the amplification and sequencing analysis of BIRC5 were designed based on GenBank sequences. Sequence analysis was carried out using SeqMan software.Amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (An et al., 2002) which was used for genotyping of the six polymorphic sites. Primer Express (Applied Biosystems) was used to design both the PCR primers and the MGB TaqMan probes. One allelic probe was labeled with FAM dye and the other with fluorescent VIC dye. Typically, PCR was run in the TaqMan Universal Master mix without UNG (Applied Biosystems) at primer concentration of 900 nM and TaqMan MGB-probe con-centration of 200 nM. The reaction was performed in a 384-well format with a total reaction volume of 5 ul using 20 ng of genomic DNA. The plate was then placed in a thermal cycler (PE 9,700, Applied Biosystems) and was heated for 2 min at 50C, then for 10 min at 95C, followed by 40 cycles of 95C for 15 sec, and finally 60C for 1 min. The TaqMan assay plate was then transferred to a Prism 7900HT instrument (Applied Biosystems) where the fluorescence intensity of each well was read. Fluorescence data files from each plate were analyzed by automated software (SDS 2.1). Detailed information concerning the primers can be obtained at the website mentioned above.We examined Lewontins D (|D|) and LD coefficient r between all pairs of biallelic loci (Hedrick, 1987). Haplotypes of each individual were determined using the algorithm developed by Stephens et al.(Stephens et al., 2001), which (PHASE) uses a Bayesian approach incorporating priori expectations of haplotypic structure from population genetic and coalescent theory. Genetic effects of inferred haplotypes were analyzed in the same way as SNPs. Logistic regression models were used for calculating odds ratios (95% confidential interval) and corresponding P-values controlling for age (continuous value) and sex (male=0, female=1) as covariates. In our analysis on HCC occurrence, LC (LC=1, no LC=0) and HBeAg (negative=0, blank=1, positive=2) were also used as covariates. Statistical powers were also calculated using PGA matlab application (Menashe, Rosenberg et al. 2008). PGA is designed to calculate statistical power and other values of case-control genetic association studies. In this study, a co-dominant (1df) model, relative risk 1.3, disease prevalence value 7.1% (Lee, Kim ORC1) and TOR complex 2 (TORC2) (Loewith et al., 2002). Especially, rapamycin-sensitive TORC1 pathway plays critical roles in cell growth. TORC1 affects ribosome biogenesis by regulating transcription of all three kinds of RNA polymerases (Mayer and Grummt, 2006). Inactivation of TORC1 results in several physiological characteristics of nutrient starvation, including induction of autophagy (Rohde et al., 2001). Recently, it has been highlighted that TOR signaling is deeply involved in eukaryotic cell aging and aging-related diseases. Inhibition of TOR signaling extends lifespan in yeast, nematode and fruitfly (Jia et al., 2004; Powers et al., 2006; Zid et al., 2009). Although the knowledge about TOR pathway has been greatly expanded by intensive research over the last two decades, there are still many unknown factors in the upstream and downstream of TOR signaling pathway due to its complexity and crosstalk with other signaling pathways.  According to the central dogma of molecular biology suggested about 50 years ago (Crick, 1958), most of the genetic information in DNA is finally transferred to proteins. Proteins, the final products in the central dogma, are not only fundamental components of living cells but also mediators of most of the cellular processes. Thus, to broaden our understanding of cellular functions and processes, it is essential to know the mechanisms how to regulate the activity or abundance of each protein. On these days, rapid developing technology in life science makes it possible to study proteins at a large-scale or proteomic level. Proteomics has become well established as a term for studying proteins at a large scale. Therefore, proteomic research might be very helpful in understanding the precise cellular functions and processes.  In the present study, to gain a novel insight into TOR signaling pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we sought to analyze proteomic expression changes in yeast cells treated with or without rapamycin. To determine proteomic expression changes in yeast, we took advantage of a collection of 4159 green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged yeast strains (Huh et al., 2003). Previously, several researches have used the yeast GFP-tagged collection for rapid and precise high-throughput measurement of protein abundances which could be represented by GFP intensities tagged on each protein (Lee et al., 2007; Newman et al., 2006; Song et al., 2009). From our proteomic analysis, we show that 83 proteins are decreased whereas 32 proteins are increased by rapamycin treatment. We suggest that these 115 proteins may be directly or indirectly involved in TOR signaling and can serve as candidates for further investigation of the effectors of TOR pathway. Further study with these candidates may reveal important insights into TOR signaling pathway.Methods.
4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains expressing GFP fusion proteins (Huh et al., 2003) were used to monitor changes in protein levels. A synthetic complete medium (SC; 0.67% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 2% glucose) were prepared as previously described (Sherman, 2002). Cells were grown to the mid-log phase in SC medium at 30C. Rapamycin (Tecoland) was dissolved in DMSO and used at 200 ng/ml concentration.GFP-tagged yeast strains were grown to the mid-log phase in 96 deep-well plates (Bioneer). The optical density (OD) and fluorescence intensity of the cells were measured in clear-bottom, 96-well plates (Greiner Bio- One) with a multilabel microplate reader (EnVision; PerkinElmer). The OD was measured using a 595-nm filter. Fluorescence intensity was measured using an excitation filter of 488 nm and an emission filter of 535 nm.To eliminate cellular autofluorescence, we set running median through OD with 3 parameters (window size: 0.01 OD; slide size: 0.002 OD; count threshold: 50). A relative abundance of each protein was calculated as:  Relative abundance of protein = fluorescence of protein - running medianwhere fluorescence of protein is a GFP intensity of each strain showing a certain OD and running median is an average GFP intensity of all strains showing the corresponding OD. To exclude an experimental variation causing plate tendency, standard deviations of non-tagged cells and 44 plates containing 4159 GFP-tagged cells between GFP intensity measurements at 0, 1 and 2 hr were calculated, and 14 plates showing higher standard deviations than those of half of non-tagged cells were excluded for further analysis. Among the remaining proteins, we selected 115 proteins showing higher relative abundance values than 1.65×(standard deviations of non-tagged cells).Results.
Physiological functions of a protein can be regulated at the level of abundance. Protein abundance changes result from a number of regulatory mechanisms ranging from transcription to post-translational modification. Thus, change in protein abundance can suggest a possibility of alteration in physiological roles of the protein. As a key regulatory signaling pathway of eukaryotic cell growth (Wullschleger et al., 2006), TOR pathway may be involved in the regulation of protein abundances. Based on this consideration, we hypothesized that protein abundance changes induced by rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of TORC1, might indicate involvement of the protein in TOR pathway. To test this hypothesis, we carried out a quantitative proteomic analysis with or without rapamycin treatment.  For a quantification of the yeast proteome, we took advantage of a collection of 4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains (Huh et al., 2003). Recently, several studies have shown that the yeast GFP-tagged collection can be used for profiling proteome expression by measuring the fluorescence intensity of each GFP-tagged strain (Lee et al., 2007; Newman et al., 2006; Song et al., 2009). To perform a proteomic quantification of the fluorescence intensities of the GFP-tagged yeast collection rapidly and precisely, we used a multilabel microplate reader that could simultaneously analyze the intensities of 96 GFP-tagged yeast cells. The validity of GFP-intensity data from a multilabel microplate reader was confirmed in our previous study (Song et al., 2009).   We measured the fluorescence of 4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains grown to the mid log-phase with or without treatment of 200 ng/ml rapamycin for 1 hr. During the data processing, we found that about 40% of raw data were not appropriate for further analysis and decided to exclude these data. The remaining 2422 GFP- intensity changes under rapamycin treatment were further analyzed. Consequently, we found that 83 proteins were significantly decreased by rapamycin treatment whereas 32 proteins were increased under the same condition (Fig. 1). These 115 proteins that underwent significant protein abundance changes under rapamycin treatment are listed in Table 1.In the previous study, DNA microarray was used to examine the genome-wide transcription alteration under rapamycin treatment (Hardwick et al., 1999). Since a change in protein level usually originates from an alteration in the gene expression, we tried to compare the protein abundance changes with the mRNA level changes under rapamycin treatment. Among the 115 proteins that showed significant protein abundance changes, 37 proteins also showed 2-fold changes in the mRNA level under rapamycin treatment. We investigated the correlation between the mRNA and protein level changes for these 37 proteins (Fig. 2). The Pearson correlation analysis of 37 proteins showed a positive correlation between the mRNA and protein expression except for 3 proteins, Rck2, Eno1 and Mak10. These 3 proteins showed a negative correlation, and exhibited an increase in protein abundance while their mRNA levels were decreased under rapamycin treatment.The 37 proteins showing significant changes in the protein and mRNA level under rapamycin treatment were classified into the Gene Ontology (GO) categories (Ashburner et al., 2000). As shown in Table 2, the 37 proteins were enriched especially in the GO categories related with protein synthesis. This enrichment resulted from inclusion of 16 ribosomal proteins. It has been shown that TOR signaling pathway controls translation initiation by regulating eIF2(Cherkasova and Hinne-the form of a web page can not be incorporated into other applications easily. Only a few services provide API access for batch mapping or incorporation into other applications.  The Protein Identifier Cross-Reference (PICR) service is a web application that provides interactive and programmatic (SOAP and REST) access to a mapping algorithm that uses the UniProt Archive (UniParc) as a data warehouse to offer protein cross-references. The Synergizer is a service for translating between sets of biological identifiers. It can, for example, translate Ensembl Gene IDs to Entrez Gene IDs, or IPI IDs to HGNC gene symbols, and much more. The Synergizer works via a web interface (for users who are not programmers) or through a web service (for programmatic access). BioMart is a query-oriented data management system, developed jointly by the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research (OICR) and the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI). It can be accessed via web services and can be adapted for identifier mapping.  BridgeDb, though not released publically yet, is another attempt at an id mapping framework for bioinformatics applications. BridgeDb lets one add the following capabilities quickly and easily: translate identifiers from one system to another, search references by id or symbol, and link out to online information for an identifier. Applications, such as the PathVisio pathway analysis tool, WikiPathways, CyThesaurus Cytoscape plug-in, and the NetworkMerge Cytoscape plug-in, are utilizing functionalities provided by BridgeDB.Methods.
Instead of developing the system from scratch, we assembled the application by re-using available services, frameworks, and libraries as much as possible.  For ID mapping itself, we used ID mapping services provided by other research groups that allowes programmatic access. We picked the service provided by PICR, Synergizer, and Biomart, as they are recently developed and/or well maintained. Currently, the BridgeDb library implements an ID mapping service for them, and we used BridgeDbs API for the access of id mapping services. Three mapping services were incorporated into one application, and relevant metadata and mapping results are fetched from each service provider on the fly; no data are stored in the application.We developed the application as a NetBeans Platform- based standalone Java Web Start rich client application.  We selected the Java environment because the developed application can be utilized under most operating systems, such as Windows, Linux, and Mac OS, provided that the Java Runtime Environment is installed. Java Web Start technology enables the standalone Java software applications to be deployed with a single click over the network. Java Web Start ensures that the most current version of the application, as well as the correct version of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE), will be deployed.   Most desktop applications have similar features, such as menus, toolbars, status bars, progress visualization, data displays, customization settings, the saving and loading of user-specific data and configurations, splash screens, About boxes, internationalization, help systems, and so on. For these and other typical client application features, a rich client platform, which is an application lifecycle environment and a basis for desktop applications, provides a framework with which the features can quickly and simply be put together. A rich client platform also frees the developer from being concerned with tasks that have little to do with the applications business logic. Currently, the NetBeans Platform and Eclipse rich client platform are in wide use for Java- based application development. Recently, some bioinformatics-related applications, such as BioClipse, Quantitative Biology Tool, SpectraSuite, InstantJChem, and ChipInspector, have been developed using the rich client platform. It is expected that utilization of the rich client platform for applications development will become popular.  We chose the NetBeans platform because there already exist many Swing-based bioinformatics applications. We plan to develop a general purpose bioinformatics application framework, covering various areas by adapting and integrating these existing applications as needed.  We designed the application functionality and layout, developed the core mapping function, and glued those to the NetBeans platform. The NetBeans platform provides quite a lot of libraries for applications development (Fig. 1), and we tried to utilize the functionalities as much as possible and minimize custom developments. After the initial steep learning curve, we were able to develop a high-quality, robust, and extensible application without much housekeeping code development effort.  By using the Swingx JXTable, the resulting mapping table can be customized further by column visibility control, row sorting, and column ordering. The copy/ paste/save supports are provided for the resulting mapping table with user-defined column and row selection (Fig. 2).Results and Discussion.
The developed application is simple and easy yet powerful for ID conversion. It supports three widely used mapping services and can convert many ids from one source database into many target databases at once. By copying the resulting mapped ids and mapping again against other cross-referencing providers, it is possible to map the ids further.  We plan to extend the source database to the other id mapping services that provide programmatic access, such as CRONOS (Waegele et al., 2009). In that respect, we will use JAX-WS directly instead of the BridgeDb library, which currently supports only a limited number of mapping services.  The application is now a standalone Web Start application, but it can be converted into a NetBeans platform plug-in with simple re-packaging. The converted plug-in can be used as an ID mapping provider for other bioinformatics applications.  There are many bioinformatics Java GUI applications, but combining each application with another is next to impossible for most cases, because each application implements its own way of plumbing.Programs that are developed as plug-ins for a rich client platform can be re-used and work together seamlessly with other independently developed plug-ins. This application can be used as an ID mapping provider plug-in for other bioinformatics applications. Applications development in this direction will facilitate the merging and integration of individual modules into a large bioinformatics applications framework that includes many areas., in their current form, consist mainly of a catalog of biologically relevant molecules, increasing the level of crosslinking to other biological databases could result in a much more useful service. As chemical databases that contain intersecting information continue to proliferate, such crosslinking is likely to increase in importance (http://zusammen.metamolecular.com/).  This paper, therefore, presents an integrated chemical database retrieval system for searching, visualizing, and analyzing chemical structures with associated biological information, including precalculated values for molecular properties (e.g., 3D coordinates, molecular weight, polar surface area, hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, rotatable bonds, XLogP, etc.). The system also offers a focused subset of calculated properties (e.g., drug-like, lead-like, etc.) for molecules that are filtered by physical properties. As such, it may be useful to those who perform docking experiments or build focused chemical databases.Data and processing.
The data were collected from and cross-referenced to public chemical data resources, such as PubChem (Wang et al., 2009), the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2000), the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI) (Degtyarenko et al., 2008), NMRShiftDB (Steinbeck et al., 2004), Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity (DSSTox) (Richard et al., 2002), and DrugBank (Wishart et al., 2008).  The public chemical data are available in various data formats (e.g., MOL, SDF, SMILES, etc.). Therefore, our parsing tool was used to parse the public chemical data to extract data according to field name mapping table, which were then dynamically uploaded to the database. The database schema consisted of chemical identification information and associated data, ranging from molecular descriptors to pathway data, spectroscopic data, and toxicological data. The molecular descriptors (3D coordinates, hydrogen-bond donors, hydrogen-bond acceptors, octanol/water partition coefficient log P, etc.) that were not available in the imported data were calcu-lated by using the calculation modules that were available from CDK (Steinbeck et al., 2003). The detailed information on the database schema and records are available at http://biocommunity.kr/chemsearch/schema. pdf. The database was implemented using the leading open-source relational database MySQL (http://www. mysql.com).Query Tool and User Interface .
The database can search over 8 million compounds through the structure retrieval systems, which provide capabilities for: (1) two-dimensional (2D) structure searches; (2) three-dimensional (3D) structure searches (Raymond et al., 2003); (3) text searches; and (4) filter searches. The three search types that are available on the 2D structure search page are as follows: (1) Substructure Search (the default): the search for all compounds that have that substructure”and other atoms. (2) Similarity Search: the search for all compounds that contain structural features that are similar, based on the Tanimoto coefficient (Butina, 1999). (3) Exact Structure: the search for all compounds that are exact structure matches in the database. The text search retrieves all protein-coding regions is to search for open reading frames (ORFs).  The open reading frame is a portion of an organisms genome containing a sequence of bases that could potentially encode a protein. In other word, it means that the region certainly looks like a gene, but it has not been proved to actually be a gene. In a gene, ORFs are located between the start code sequence (initiation codon) and stop code sequence (termination codon) so that the existence of an ORF, especially a long one, can be usually a good indication of the presence of a gene in the surrounding sequence. However, ORFs are usually encountered when sifting through pieces of DNA while trying to locate a gene. In addition, ORFs can also occur by chance outside of genes. The situation in prokaryotes is relatively straightforward since scarcely any eubacterial and archaeal genes contain introns. The situation is much more complicated in eukaryotes where the majority of genes are composed of introns and exons, and further analysis must be required to detect the intron/exon boundaries and assemble the exons into a contiguous coding sequences. The Coding Sequence (CDS) and the ORF may be interchangeable but they are a little different from each other. The CDS is the actual region of DNA that is translated to form proteins. In Eukaryotes, while the ORF may contain introns as well, the CDS refers to contiguous coding sequence or concatenated exons that can be divided into codons. In Prokaryotes, the ORF and the CDS can be considered the same entity.  As mentioned above, the ORF can be a good indication of the presence of a CDS or a gene and the determination of ORFs is the first step toward the gene prediction, especially for prokaryotes. Furthermore, ample ORFs of specific organisms are required to build a general probabilistic model of the gene structural and compositional properties of genomic DNA sequences of the corresponding organisms, which is introduced and applied to the problem of identifying genes in unannotated genomic sequences. In terms of sequence annotation, it may be reasonable that all possible ORFs should be provided regardless of high specificity and the curator should decide on which ORFs are actually coding regions. In these respects, we have developed a web-based ORF search tool, the ORF Miner, which fo-cuses on identifying literal ORF based on genetic codes.Overview and Features of ORF Miner.
The ORF Miner is implemented in PHP and GD graphics library on a PC server of which the operating system is Red Hat Linux 3.4.3-9.EL4. It can run on any Linux or Unix system that has PHP version 5.2 or higher and GD version 2.0 or higher alike installed and be available via a Apache web server. The client requests the web server to run a PHP-CGI server, the ORF Miner, with a set of input parameters. In response to the request, the web server runs the ORF Miner and receives the output results that will be transmitted to be finally displayed in the client (Fig. 1).  The parameters for this tool consist of input sequence, genetic code, minimum ORF size, and display data type (Fig. 2). The input sequence can be directly cut and pasted into the edit box or be uploaded from a file. Both of FASTA format and plain text format are allowed for the input sequence. In case of genetic code parameter, 17 genetic codes are provided to be exclusively chosen among them. This tool identifies all open reading frames using the standard or alternative genetic codes. Moreover, the parameter Output sequence type can be set to one of Nucleotide, Peptide or Both and the user can specify the minimum ORF size as a parameter. A minimum ORF size prevents short ORFs from being detected and displayed.  The strategy of ORF Miner to detect ORFs can be summarized as follows:  a. Check if all the parameters are set correctly before proceeding forward. An error message will be displayed in case there is something wrong with any parameter setting.  b. Read the input DNA sequence in six reading frames. The input sequence will be considered as the forward strand. Three are in the forward and three in the reverse direction.  c. Use foreach loop to scan the DNA sequence for start and stop codons in each of the six reading frames on both strands using pattern matching (regular expressions). Start and stops codons are defined by the genetic code specified by the user.  d. Store the coordinate, nucleotide sequence and translated protein sequence of the detected ORF of length higher than or equal to minimum OFR length value into a hashing table (an associative array) for corresponding reading frame.  e. Draw a figure with GD library, which displays the relative positions of all detected ORFs and report a list of ORFs.  The analysis output looks like the one in Fig. 3. The upper part of the analysis output contains the figure drawn up with GD library. It has both shaded and unshaded portions. The shaded portions correspond to ORFs. A list of all detected ORFs is displayed as a FASTA format under the output figure. In the analysis output, (1), (2), and (3) refer to the first, the second, and the third reading frame of the forward strand respectively and (-1), (-2), and (-3) refer to corresponding reading frame of the reverse strand. The symbols (+) and (-) indicate forward strand and the reverse strand respectively. The ORFs less than minimum ORF length value will not be shown in the analysis output. The comment line in a FASTA format in a list of ORFs provides useful information on each ORF, including reading frame, strand, coordinate (start, end), and length.Discussion.
The ORF Miner is a graphical analysis utility which de-n, from spontaneous recovery to chronic infection, which may further develop to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Age at infection is a crucial factor on clinical outcome. Most HBV infection occurs at birth or within 5 years after the birth, and they also become chronic carriers. HBV causes not only Hepatitis B; chronic infection of the virus could also lead to liver cirrhosis (LC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It has been noted that HBV carriers have as much as 100 times the risk of developing HCC than non-carriers (Koshy, 1998).  Hepatocellular carcinoma is a primary cancer type of liver. HCC usually develops after HBV infection or development of LC and is one of the most common types of tumors worldwide. It generally affects men more than women, and the age of onset is usually between 30s to 50s (Kumar V, 2003). Pathogenesis of HCC is similar to other types of cancers in that HCC develops when a mutation occurs at cellular machinery which results in faster replication of the cell and/or nullification of apoptosis. Chronic infection of Hepatitis B or C virus aids the development of HCC because the viruses cause the immune system to attack the body’s own liver cell. This cycle of constant damaging and repair can lead to mistakes which may then result in carcinogenesis. Recently, it has been suggested that genetic polymorphisms may be associated with the risk of HCC (Chun et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2006; Oh et al., 2008; Park et al., 2006; Park et al., 2007; Shin et al., 2003; Shin et al., 2007).  SERPINB5 is one of serpins and a tumor suppressor gene (Sager et al., 1997), also commonly known as maspin. Serpins are sets of proteins that are able to inhibit proteases and affect proteolytic cascades. However, SERPINB5 is a special case, which acts as a tumor suppressor gene instead of affecting protein pathways. SERPINB5 has previously shown the ability to suppress tumor cells in places such as bones, pancreas, and esophagus (Cai et al., 2009; Hall et al., 2008; Hong et al., 2009). From these findings, it can be inferred that SERPINB5 has a potent ability to suppress tumor cells. It has also been reported that SERPINB12, a member of SERPIN family and a gene that is resided right next to SERPINB5, is expressed in liver (Askew et al., 2001). SEPRINB12 also affects many tissues of body, including pancreas and bone marrows, which are same parts that are affected by SERPINB5. Therefore, we can also infer that SERPINB5 may affect liver as well. As mentioned above, genetic change may be a factor of HCC carcinogenesis, so we hypothesized that genetic polymorphisms of SERPINB5 could influence HBV clearance or HCC development of HBV infected patients.Methods.
A total of 1,074 Korean subjects having either present or past evidence of HBV infection were prospectively enrolled from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit or from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital between January 2001 and August 2003. Subjects were placed in two different groups according to serologic markers: the chronic carrier (CC) group, or the spontaneous recovery (SR) group. The CC and SR cohorts consisted of 639 and 435 subjects, respectively (Table 1). The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) over a 6-month period, and for both anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively. Asymptomatic HBV carriers were also included in CC group. These patients usually have inactive liver disease on liver biopsy. However, it has been known that in these patients, HBV continues to replicate, albeit very low levels, some patients have residual liver disease, and HCC develop frequently. We excluded subjects who were positive for anti-HBs but not for anti-HBc, and those positive for anti-HCV or anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin-shi, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). The patients who had any other types of liver disease such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, or Budd- Chiari syndrome were also excluded. No patients had a previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment. Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. The clinical parameters are summarized in Table 1.In order to discover genetic variants, we have sequenced exons and their flanking regions, including the promoter region (1.4 kb) in 24 Korean unrelated individual DNA samples using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Primer sets for the amplification and sequencing analysis of SERPINB5 were designed based on GenBank sequences (Ref. Genome seq.; NC_000018.9). Sequence analysis was carried out using SeqMan software.For genotyping of eleven polymorphic sites, amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (An et al., 2002). Primer Express (Applied Biosystems) was used to design both the PCR primers and the MGB TaqMan probes. One allelic probe was labeled with the FAM dye and the other with the fluorescent VIC dye. These probes are listed in Supplement Table 1. Typically, PCR was run in the TaqMan Universal Master is a crucial factor in bringing about acute and chronic liver diseases (Lin et al., 2005). Approximately 350 million people are chronically infected with HBV all over the world. In fact, more than 1 million HBV carriers die annually because of HBV-related diseases such as liver cancer (Chang et al., 2005). Each year, nearly 50 million cases are newly diagnosed, and out of that, 90% of the affected individuals were infants while the remaining 510% were adults (Merican et al., 2000). Continuous HBV infection can cause liver cirrhosis (LC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Lin et al., 2005). HCC is the most widespread and severe form of malignancies that are diagnosed in adults. Patients infected with the hepatitis B or C virus are more likely to develop HCC, which in turn is accompanied by liver cirrhosis. The progression of HCC results in a stepwise series of events. Each step in the development of HCC appears to be linked to separate genetic and epigenetic aberrations. These changes are associated with alterations in the expression or formation of an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene (Patil et al., 2009). In addition, several previous studies have also reported associations between genetic polymorphisms and the risk of HCC and/or HBV clearance, e.g., histone deacetylase-10 (HDAC10) and secreted phosphoprotein-1 (SPP1) polymorphisms, and interleukin-10 (IL10) haplotypes were also shown to be associated with HBV clearance and/or HCC development (Lin et al., 2005; Park et al., 2007; Shin et al., 2003; Shin et al., 2007).  Members of the integrin family, the beta1 (1) integrins (ITGB1; MIM# 135630) are heterodimeric structures consisting of a common 1 subunit that is non-covalently associated with one of nine different subunits. These molecules are widely distributed in various cells and they mediate cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions that are related to many biological functions in the development of cell or tissues, hemostasis and immune response (Garrido et al., 2001). It has been shown that the deregulation of cell adhesion to the ECM and the abnormal expression of ITGB1s, particularly the 51 down-regulation, are closely associated with tumor development and metastasis. Especially in the liver, the expression of integrins and ECM proteins has been linked to HBV infection and HCC development (Lara-Pezzi et al., 2001; Lee et al., 2009).  Based on these observations in the area of tumor and cancer development, we hypothesized that the polymorphisms in the ITGB1 gene could influence the clearance of HBV and HCC progression among HBV-infected patients. We performed extensive screening of ITGB1 by direct sequencing to detect polymorphisms, and we examined their genetic associations with HBV clearance and HCC progression. Here, we report 23 genetic polymorphisms identified in ITGB1 and their genetic associations with HBV clearance and HCC progression in a Korean population (n=1,103).Methods.
A total of 1,103 Korean subjects having either present or past evidence of HBV infection were prospectively extracted from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit and from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital from January 2001 to August 2003. These subjects were divided into two groups according to their serologic markers: the chronic carrier (CC) group and the spontaneously recovered (SR) group. The CC and SR groups were composed of 670 and 433 subjects, respectively (Table 1). The HBsAg-positive patients (CC group) were hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)- positive over a 6-month period. They were followed up for disease progression at least every 6 months. The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity of the hepatitis B surface antigen (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany), anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively, over a 6-month period. The CC group was further divided into two subgroups, i.e., those without (the CH/LC group; n=343) and those with HCC (the HCC group; n=327), according to the absence or presence of HCC, respectively. We excluded subjects who were positive for anti-HBs only and not for anti-HBc, as well as those who were positive for anti-HCV and anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). The patients who had other types of liver disease such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, or Budd-Chiari syndrome were also excluded from the sample. None of the patients had a previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment.  Informed consent was gained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. Liver cirrhosis was diagnosed pathologically or by the clinical evidences of portal hypertension such as visible collateral vessels on the abdominal wall, esophageal varices on the esophagogastroscopy, palpable splenomegaly, and sonographically definite findings of cirrhotic liver or ascites. HCC was diagnosed as described previously (Bruix et al., 2001). The clinical parameters are summarized in Table 1.Using the ABI PRISM 3730 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), we sequenced all exons, including exon-intron boundaries and promoter regions (1.5 kb), to discover polymorphisms of the ITGB1 gene using DNA samples of 24 unrelated healthy Korean individuals. Twenty seven primer sets for amplification (Supplementary Table 1) and sequencing analysis were designed based on GenBank sequences (NT_008705.15). Sequence variants were verified by chromatograms.In order to genotype the polymorphic sites in our study, amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (Livak, 1999). Primer Express (Applied Biosystems) was used to design both the PCR primers and the MGB TaqMan probes. One allelic probe was labeled with the FAM dye and the other with the fluorescent VIC dye (Supplementary Table 2). Typically, PCR was run in the TaqMan Universal Master mix without UNG (Applied Biosystems) at a primer concentration of 900 nM and a r, 2005). There is accumulating evidence which suggests substantial genetic contribution to ASD development (Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley, 2001; Veenstra- VanderWeele and Cook, 2004). For example, the concordance rate of autism was significantly higher in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic twins (Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley, 2001; Veenstra-VanderWeele and Cook, 2004). Although previous studies including linkage analyses have revealed a number of potential ASD-associated loci, genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of the disease has made it difficult to replicate the results as well as to identify ASD-associated genetic mechanisms (Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley, 2001; Klauck, 2006; Veenstra-VanderWeele and Cook, 2004).  Recently a new type of human genetic variation named copy number variant (CNV) has been suggested as one of the major sources of genomic diversity ranging from normal phenotypic heterogeneity to disease susceptibility (Freeman et al., 2006; Iafrate et al., 2004; Sebat et al., 2004). Indeed, lines of evidence have been reported which demonstrated the association between CNV and ASD (Cho et al., 2009; Cook and Scherer, 2008; Glessner et al., 2009; Marshall et al., 2008; Sebat et al., 2007). In our previous study, we identified 38 copy number variable regions in ASD patients, two of which (CNVs on 8p23.1 and 17p11.2) were found to be significantly associated with ASD (Cho et al., 2009).  Using 27 CNV loci previously reported to be associated with ASD including ours, we developed an 8.5K ASD-specific BAC array and screened whether the association between those CNVs would be replicated in patient cell lines of four different ethnic groups.Methods.
We used DNA extracted from B-lymphocyte cell lines of 8 ASD patients of four different ethnicities; Caucasian, Chinese, Asiatic Indian, and Hispanic (Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, USA). General characteristics of the 8 ASD patients are shown in Table 1. As normal control subjects, we used 10 normal Korean adults without any sign of ASD and other genetic disorders. Using the D5500A PUREGENE DNA Isolation kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA), we extracted genomic DNA from the blood of controls according to manufacturer’s instructions. DNA quantity and quality were checked by a NanoDrop assay and 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. This study was performed under the approval of the Institutional Review Boards of The Catholic University of Korea (CUMC07U025).In total, 846 BAC clones representing the 27 candidate CNV regions were selected from the DNA BAC library (Macrogen, Seoul, Korea) and the BAC clone DNA was extracted as described elsewhere (Cho et al., 2009; Chung et al., 2004). In brief, each BAC clone was isolated, grown in 500ml of culture media, pelleted, from which DNA was extracted using an alkaline lysis method. All selected clones were bi-directionally sequenced using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), and their sequences were blasted and mapped according to their linear positions. Extracted BAC DNA was dissolved in 50% DMSO with a concentration of 400~500ng/ul and spotted in triplicate onto the glass by the Genemachines OmniGrid 100 arrayer (Digilab Genomic Solutions, Holliston, MA, USA). We used Corning UltraGAPS amine coating slides (Corning, Acton, MA, USA) and Telecam SMP4 pins (Arrayit Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for DNA spotting. We followed processes for a general contact type spotter. Array-CGH was performed as described elsewhere using the MAUI hybridization station (BioMicro Systems, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA) (Joo et al., 2008). In one tube, Cy3-labeled sample and Cy5-labeled reference DNAs were mixed together and 50g human Cot I DNA (HybMasker, ConnectaGen, Seoul, Korea), 20l of 3 M sodium acetate and 600l of cold 100% ethanol were added to precipitate DNA. The obtained pellet was re-suspended in 40l of hybridization solution containing 50% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 2 SSC, 4% SDS and 200 ug of yeast tRNA. Hybridization was performed in slide chambers for 48 hr at 37C. After the hybridization, slides were washed serially at room temperature in solution 1 (2X saline-sodium citrate (SSC), 0.1% SDS) for 10 min (1X), in solution 2 (0.1X SSC, 0.1% SDS) for 10 min (2X) and in solution 3 (0.1X SSC) for 1 min (3X) followed by rinsing in distilled water for 10 sec. Finally, the slides were spin-dried for 2 min at 1000 rpm. All the experiments were duplicated and dye- swapping was done for more reliable interpretation. Arrays were scanned and analyzed using the GenePix 4200A two-color fluorescent scanner (MDS Analytical Technologies, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and the images were processed using the MacViewer 1.6 imaging software (Macrogen, Seoul, Korea). Signal intensity ratios (test/reference) were measured and converted to log2 scale. Background corrected signal intensity ratios were normalized using Lowess normalization. For defining CNVs, we set the cut-off values of signal intensity ratios at above 0.25 (log2 scale) for copy number gain and at below 0.25 for copy number loss according to our previous study (Cho et al., 2009; Jeong et al., 2008). We also analyzed dye-swap experiment results to get more reliable CNV call. If a CNV call is true, its test/reference intensity ratio value must be inverted by switching the dyes. Only the original ratios and inverted dye swap signals were observed, the according CNV was called as a true one. t of them have focused on stress proteins, such as HSP, and MAPK signaling or DNA damages (Belyaev et al., 2006; Chauhan et al., 2006; Friedman et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2006; Sanchez et al., 2007; Sanchez et al., 2008, Verschaeve et al., 2009). For instance, Friedman et al. (2007) found that exposure of HeLa and Rat1 cells to 875 MHz RF radiation induces the activation of the ERK cascade through ROS generation via NADH oxidase but not that of JNKs or p38 MAPKs. However, we previously reported that the phosphorylation of MAPKs (ERK, JNK, and p38) did not change after exposure of auditory hair cells to 1763 MHz at a 20-W/kg SAR for up to 2 h (Huang et al., 2008).  However, RF radiation can affect not only specific genes but also whole genome. If RF radiation exposure induces any biological effects in human, it must change cell behavior and gene expression (McNamee et al., 2009; Vanderstraeten et al., 2008). To date, some microarray analyses have been performed to elucidate the effects of RF radiation on biological systems (Chauhan et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2007; Paparini et al., 2009; Qutob et al., 2006; Sanchez et al., 2007; Whitehead et al., 2006; Zeng et al., 2006; Zhao et al., 2007). For example, non-thermal RF radiation did not affect gene expression in U87MG glioblastoma cells exposed to 1.9 GHz RF at SARs from 0.1 to 10 W/kg for 4 h and 24 h, respectively (Qutob et al., 2006; Chauhan et al., 2007). It has been reported that analysis of gene expression identified a handful of consistently changed genes in MCF-7 cells after exposure to RF radiation at a low SAR (up to 3.5 W/kg) for 24 h. However, these differentially expressed genes were not confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR, implying that the observed effects might have occurred by chance (Zeng et al., 2006). Similarly, RF exposure to C3H 10T 1/2 cells at a 5-W/kg SAR induced no greater changes in gene expression compared to the sham group (Whitehead et al., 2006). In addition, we previously reported unchangeability in the phosphorylation of MAPKs, such as ERK, JNK, and p38, after exposure of auditory hair cells to 1,763 MHz at a 20-W/kg SAR for up to 2 h. Moreover, neither any cell cycle change nor DNA damage was detected under these conditions. Meanwhile, a genome wide analysis of gene expression indicated that some genes, including cytokine receptor genes, were downregulated upon RF radiation, but they were not directly related to cell proliferation or DNA damage responses (Huang et al., 2008).   Although most studies on the biological effects of RF exposure could not detect any molecular changes, some reports demonstrated RF-specific gene expression (Belyaev et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2005; Nylund et al., 2006). For example, Lee et al. (2005) used the serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) technique and found that 2.45 GHz RF radiation at a 10-W/kg SAR for 26 h affected the expression of 221 genes, including apoptosis-related genes and cell cycle genes, in human HL-60 cells without a significant increase of HSP expression. Nylund et al. (2006) reported that two variants of a human endothelial cell line responded differently to 900 MHz GSM signal mobile phone radiation (Nylund et al., 2006). With regard to the effect of RF exposure to rat brain, Belyaev et al. (2006) reported that GSM at 915 MHz induced no detectable DNA double-stranded breaks or changes in chromatin conformation but affected the expression of genes related to neurotransmitter regulation, blood brain barrier, and melatonin production in rat brain cells. Taken together, this evidence is controversial and not reproducible, although we could consider that different biological samples and different species might respond differently to RF radiation. To assess the biological effect of RF radiation, most studies using microarray have applied relatively low SARs (0.120 W/kg) to cancer cells or tissues.   In this study, we tried to use genome wide gene expression as the indicator to assess the biological effect of RF radiation at high SARs. We exposed normal WI-38 human fibroblast cells to 1,763 MHz RF radiation at a 60-W/kg SAR for 24 h and performed microarray to analyze the genome wide response to RF radiation. Methods.
Normal WI-38 human lung fibroblast cells were purchased from ATCC and grown in DMEM (Wellgene, Korea), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), at 37C in a 5% CO incubator. The cells from passage 18 to 21 were used for this study. Morphological changes in the cells were observed under a phase contrast microscope (magnification 100X), and cell numbers were checked using a hemocytometer.The conditions for RF exposure were described in a previous study (Lee et al., 2006). Briefly, a real Code Domain Multiple Access (CDMA) signal at 1,762.5 MHz was applied for RF exposure. The exposure system was first equilibrated for 2 h, and WI-38 cells in a 100-mm culture dish containing 18 ml of growth medium were exposed at SAR values of 60 W per kg for 24 h with the operating cooling system. Before and after radiation exposure, the temperature of each sample was measured. All exposures were performed in triplicate independently. Cells were immediately harvested and processed for further analysis. Unexposed cells were also divided separately and cultured at 37C in a 5% CO incubator as a control (n=3).Total RNA was extracted by using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit. (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). The purity and concentration of RNA were determined by a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA) and Agilent Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The RNA was amplified and labeled according to the Affymetrix GeneChip Whole Transcript (WT) Sense Target Labeling protocol. The resulting labeled cDNA was hybridized to Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays and scanned. The scanned raw expression values were background-corrected, normalized, and summarized using the RMA approach in the Bioconductor affy package. The resulting log2- transformed data were used for further analyses.A nonspecific filtering was performed to remove the noninformative probe sets with low variability, because these probe sets may lack the sensitivity for us to infer differential expression. Only the probe sets that had a standard deviation above the value of shorth (the mean of the shortest interval containing half of the data) were included. Differentially expressed probe sets were identified using linear models of the limma package from Bioconductor, applying the moderated t-statistics based on an empirical Bayes approach. Comparisons were made between two groups: three replicates that were exposed to 1,763 MHz RF at an SAR of 60 W/kg for 24 hours and three controls without RF exposure. The Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate-adjusted p value (BH FDR p value) was used for correction of multiple ation, the temperature remains constant within a normal physiological range. In contrast, if we apply higher SAR (10 W/kg) and/or prolonged RF exposure, the temperature of exposure system is increased even in the presence of cooling system. In this sense, the expression of HSP70 increased time- and dose-dependently at above 50 W/kg SAR of 2,450 MHz for 13 h in glioblastoma cells (Wang et al., 2006). However, the expression of heat shock proteins may change upon non-specific stimuli.  Recent studies have focused on effect of non-thermal RF radiation in biological systems (Chauhan et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2006; Luukkonen et al., 2009; Qutob et al., 2006; Sanchez et al., 2007; Takashima et al., 2006; Verschaeve, 2009). Most of these studies have shown no significant effect on cellular and molecular levels in a variety of condition. Microarray analysis of gene expression showed that there is no evidence that non-thermal RF radiation affect gene expression in U87MG glioblastoma cells exposed to 1.9 GHz RF at SARs from 0.1 to 10 W/kg for 4 h and 24h, respectively (Chauhan et al., 2007; Qutob et al., 2006). Takashima et al. (2006) also failed to find any changes in cell proliferation with continuous exposure at up to 100 W/kg except at SAR of 200 W/kg suggesting that RF radiation at 200 W/kg SAR affected the cells by combined with heating medium. Similarly, Sanchez et al. reported that there were no effects of 1,800 MHz RF radiation at 2 W/kg SAR on HSP expression and apoptosis in human skin cells compare to ultraviolet (UV) and heat shock (Sanchez et al., 2007). In our previous studies, neither of cell cycle changes nor DNA damage as was detected in after 1,763 MHz RF exposure at an SAR of 10 W/kg SAR in Jurkat-T cells or 20 W/kg in auditory hair cells (Huang et al., 2008).   Although most of the studies on the biological effect of RF exposure could not detect any molecular changes, some reports could demonstrate RF-specific gene expression. Exposure of 2.45 GHz high frequency electromagnetic field to glioma cells at SAR levels above 20 W/kg led to an increased level of HSP70, even when the effect of raised temperature is taken into account (Tian et al., 2002). Lee et al. found that 2.45 GHz RF radiation at 10 W/kg of SAR for 26 h affected expression of 221 genes including apoptosis-related genes and the cell cycle genes in human HL60 cells without significant increase of HSP expression (Lee et al., 2005). 1,800 MHz RF radiation at 2 W/kg got 24 h in rat neuron altered expression of cytoskeleton genes such as microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and signal transduction-related genes as well as immediate early gene (EGR1) (Zhao et al., 2007). Recently, it has been shown that exposure to 900 MHz GSM-modulated RF at 1 W/kg SAR for up to 72 h alters morphological maturation of neural cells through cytoskeleton regulating factors such as -thymosin (Del et al., 2009). These reports suggest that RF exposure might alter the cytoskeleton and activates signal transduction pathways, thus lead to the abnormal neural growth. Yu et al. also found that RF exposure induce HSP27 and HSP70 as well as phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK1/2 in human lens epithelial cells (Yu et al., 2007).   In this study, we exposed normal human fibroblast, WI-38 cells to 1,763 MHz RF radiation at 60 W/kg SAR for 24h and evaluated effects of RF radiation on molecular level by quantitative RT-PCR for three HSP genes and seven stress-related genes, which were selected from gene expression analysis using microarray on RF-exposed cells.Methods.
Normal human lung fibroblast, WI-38 cells were purchased from ATCC and grown in DMEM (Wellgene, Korea) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37C in a 5% CO incubator. The cells with passage number from 18 to 21 were used for this study. Morphological changes in cells were observed under phase contrast microscope (magnification 40X) and cell numbers were checked using hemocytometer.The condition for RF exposure was described in the previous study (Lee et al., 2006). Briefly, a real Code Domain Multiple Access (CDMA) signal at 1,762.5 MHz was applied for RF exposure. The exposure system was first equilibrated to 37C for 2 h and WI-38 cells in 100 mm culture dish containing 18 ml of growth medium were exposed at SAR values of 60 W per kg for 24 h. The temperature in the chamber was maintained at 37±0.2C by circulating water within the cavity for RF only samples (n=4), while the temperature in the chamber was not controlled for RF/HS samples (n=4). Before and after RF radiation exposure, temperature of each sample was measured (Fig. 1). Cells were immediately harvested, counted and processed for further analysis. Cells were also divided separately and cultured at 37C in a 5% CO incubator as a control (n=8). incidence of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis (Yamazaki et al., 2006).   Together with myotoxicity, there have been lingering concerns regarding statin-induced hepatotoxicity from the time of introduction of lovastatin in 1987, the first member of the class. Millions of patients have now received these drugs. Asymptomatic increases in aminotransferase levels develop frequently (Maddrey et al., 2005). Since statins inhibit cholesterol synthesis in the liver much more than in any other tissue, it is not surprising that elevations in the liver enzymes ALT and AST have been noted since the first clinical trial with lovastatin (Hamelin et al., 1998). In the case of statin therapy, four types of hepatic syndromes need to be considered; acute liver failure, hepatitis, cholestasis and transaminitis. Initial toxicology studies in animals suggested that statins may cause significant liver problems. Although the usual doses of lovastatin did not cause significant liver injury, when given in very high dose they caused hepatocellular necrosis in rabbits (Chalasani,et al., 2005). Similarly, high doses of simvastatin caused hepatocellular necrosis in guinea pig (Chalasani et al., 2005). The liver injury in these animals could be prevented or reversed with supplementing animals with mevalonate suggesting that depletion of mevalonate or its down-stream metabolite might be responsible for liver injury (Chalasani et al., 2005).  According to adverse effect reports, it seemed that all of these hepatic adverse effects do not have any significant increase with statin therapy (Abu, et al., 2005). However, as the use of lipid lowering treatment including statins was extended to a larger number of high-risk patients, the potential of statin-induced liver toxicity became a major concern for the safety profile of statins. Moreover, a large-scale clinical study encouraged the use of statins in a wide range of patients at varying levels of risk for cardiovascular events and independently of baseline cholesterol levels (Heart Protection Study, 2002, Wilmshurst et al., 2002).   Taken together, it seemed that the most concerning issue for statin safety resides its potential to cause acute liver failure during wide use of cholesterol lowering therapy. To address this concern, it would be helpful to understand underlying mechanism of statin-in-duced toxicity using a commonly used system. In the presented work, rat primary hepatocytes were used as a model system to assess statin-induced toxicity by combining microarray technique. This effort will provide deeper knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for the toxic effects of statins along with putative indicator genes for statin -induced toxicity in rat primary hepatocytes. Methods.
Rat primary hepatocytes were isolated using a modified method described in elsewhere (Klaunig, et al.) and by Percoll centrifugation. All media and reagents were purchased from Gibco (NY, USA) unless mentioned differently. In brief, liver was perfused via portal vein first with Ca/Mg free Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS-) containing 0.5 mM EGTA and 10 mM HEPES for 23 min and then with HBSS with Ca/Mg containing 10 mM HEPES and 0.5 mg/ml collagenase (Wako) for 67 min at a flow rate of 20 ml/min. Perfused livers were isolated, decapsulated and dispersed in ice-cold HBSS-. Dispersed cells were filtered with 100m meshes, rinsed and suspended in ice-cold 50% (v/v) Percoll (Amersham, NJ, USA) and centrifuged at 50 g for 10 min at 4C. Hepatocytes were rinsed and suspended in Williams E culture media supplemented with 10% (v/v) FCS, 2 mM L-glutamate, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100g/ml streptomycin and 10 mM HEPES. Cell cultures showing more than 80% viability, based on trypan blue exclusion, were used for further experiment. All cultures were maintained at 37C in a water-saturated 5% CO incubator and culture media were changed every day.Resazurin assay was performed to estimate cell toxicity of each drug using rat primary hepatocytes. Drugs were first dissolved in DMSO (Sigma), diluted to the desired concentration with water and administrated to cells for 24 hours. Then 20L of CellTiter-Blue (Promega) were added and the treated cells were cultivated in CO incubator (NuAire, US/NU-4350G) for 4 hours. The level of toxicity was observed by optical density using microplate reader (SpectraMax plus/384, Molecular Devices, USA) at wavelength of 570 nm. The analytic grade statins were purchased from Sequoia Research Product (Pangbourne, UK). The cells were treated with the drugs at designated concentrations (EC, 1/25 of LC, 1/5 of LC and LC) for 24 hours and lysed with lysis buffer (Invitrogen). The RNAs were extracted using easy-spin Total RNA Extraction Kit (Invitrogen). Extracted RNAs were quantified with spectrophotometer (NanoDrop ND-1000, Rockland, DE, USA), and their purity was estimated by ratio of optical density at 230/260 nm and 260/280 nm of wavelength. Rat Genome 230 2.0 GeneChips (Affymetrix, USA) were used to profile gene expression modulation caused by statins in this experiment. All procedures were followed by the manufacturers protocol described in elsewhere (Ahn et al., 2009). In short, the first and second strand cDNAs were synthesized using One-Cycle cDNA Synthesis Kit 1 and Sample Cleanup Module 1. cRNAs were transcribed from the synthesized cDNA by In Vitro Transcription (IVT) Labeling Kit 1, and fragmented in 5X fragmentation buffer at 94C for 35 min. The fragmented cRNAs were hybridized in the gene chips using Hybridization Control Kit 1, and incubated at 45C for 16 hours. Then the chips were washed and scanned using Affymetrix GeneChip Scanner.The microarray data were uploaded to Genplex 3.0 program (Istech, Korea) and normalized with MAS5, Global & scale method recommended by Affymetrix. Further statistical analyses were mainly performed using tools provided by Genplex program. Results and Discussion.
We treated rat primary hepatocytes with variety of concentration of test compounds, cerivastatin, simvastatin and lovastatin for 24 h to monitor their effects on cell viability using MTT assay. Cerivastatin, simvastatin and lovastatin showed significant cell death and revealed very typical viability curves with dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1). The LC20 for each drug were determined as 160M, 120M and 200M respectively. Cell viability test revealed that simvastatin caused more cytotoxicity than cerivastatin and lovastatin in rat primary hepatocytes. This observation was further confirmed by other cell viability assay using HepG2 cells (data not shown) negative effects in the kidney is not fully understood. One of the main and common mechanisms behind heavy metal toxicity has been attributed to oxidative stress. Mercury induces oxidative stress and ROS production by binding to intracellular thiols. This metal also cause direct damage to the mitochondrial and microsome metabolism, and modifies renal cell membrane and tubular polarity (Lash and Zalups, 1992).   Changes in the expression of mRNA specifically expressed in the injured kidney cells are some of the earliest events that accompany renal injury. This is accompanied by alterations in the expression of other genes (e.g. KIM1, cystatin C, clusterin and osteopontin) that contribute either to cellular repair or recovery of renal function (Amin et al., 2004). A number of approaches have been used to identify components of the complex responses to nephrotoxicants, which are not only potential biomarkers but also therapeutic targets. Gene expression in acute renal failure has been analyzed with microarrays in several studies (Amin et al., 2004; Huang et al., 2001; Safirstein, 2004). However, the results vary because of a lot of potential confounding factor, such as species difference, injury difference, microarray platform difference and dose and time difference.   Many studies identified KIM1 as potential renal marker through gene expression analyses after kidney injury. KIM1 is a type I transmenbrane protein that is not detectable in normal kidney but is expressed at high levels in proximal tubule epithelial cells after toxic injury (Ferguson et al., 2008; Ichimura et al., 2004). Recently, the United States Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency have adopted KIM1 as a standard biomarker for the preclinical safety evaluation of novel drug candidates. While KIM1 was adopted as a biomarker of renal toxicity, several studies were undertaken in order to evaluate the utility of other putative renal toxicity biomarkers.   To circumvent inconsistency caused by confounding factors in in vivo studies, we set an in vitro study model for nephrotoxicity by using a rat kidney epithelium originated cell line, NRK-52. To address biological effect of mercuric chloride on the cell line, Rat Genome Survey Arrays array was used to determine gene expression pattern elicited by mercuric chloride in NRK-52E kidney cell lines. Methods.
Mercuric chloride was purchased Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). DMEM, Fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin, TRIzol and DEPC-treated water were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA).NRK-52E cell line, a rat renal proximal tubular cell, were cultured in DMEM/F-12 (50/50) medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 0.02M NaHCO, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin and maintained in monolayer culture at 37C in an incubator of humidified air with 5% CO. Subconfluent cells (80%) were passaged with a solution containing 0.05% trypsin and 0.02% EDTA.NRK-52E cells were treated with test substances dissolved in PBS for 12 h. After the treatment, cell viability was assessed using MTT assay kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The cell culture medium was withdrawn by remaining 100l/well at the end of exposure time. An addition of 10l/well MTT stock solution (5 mg/ml) is followed by an incubation period of 4h (37C, 5% CO). Afterwards 100l/well solubilization solution was added, followed by a mixing. A kinetic assay was performed by measuring its absorbance (570 nm) in a SpectraMax microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Absorbance values were obtained from more than three independent experiments.Mercuric chloride was treated with 1/25 of IC20 (1.6M, low), 1/5 of IC20 (8M, mid) or IC20 (40M, high), and total RNA were obtained at 2, 6 or 12 h after initial treatment.  Total RNA was extracted from each time and dose point using Trizol in accordance with the manufacturers procedures. The quality of the total RNA was assessed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. RNA quantification and purity (260/280 ratio) were determined with a UV/VIS spectrophotometer (ND-1000, NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA).The Applied Biosystems Rat Genome Survey Arrays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), which contain 60-mer oligonucleotide probes representing a set of 32,878 individual mouse genes and more than 250 control probes, were used for differential gene expression profiles. Microarray experiments were performed according to the manufacturerjs instructions. Digoxigenin (DIG)-UTP-labeled cRNA was generated from 5g of total RNA and amplified using a chemiluminescent reverse transcription (RT) in vitro transcription labeling kit (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, each microarray was prehybridized in hybridization buffer with blocking reagent at 55C for 1 h. DIG-labeled cRNA targets (10g) were fragmented to 100400 bp and hybridized with each prehybridized microarray at 55C for 16 h. The arrays were washed with hybridization wash buffer and then with chemiluminescence rinse buffer. Chemiluminescent signals were generated by incubating the arrays with anti-DIG-alkaline phosphatase and chemiluminescence substrate. Images were collected for each microarray using the 1700 Chemiluminescent Microarray Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Microarray images were autogridded, and the chemiluminescent signals were quantified, corrected for background, spatially normalized, and exported for a quality report. Microarray data with quality reports above the manufacturer's threshold were used for further analysis.Signal intensities were imported into GenPlex software (Istech, Korea), where inter-array quantile normalization was performed to minimize the effect of external variables that might be introduced into the data. Quality filtering of unreliable spots (flag value100 and S/N2) was performed before normalization. Then, the expression intensities were log transformed. We took the average value from the gene expression ratio obtained in three biological replicates. DEGs were selected on the basis of ratios (fold change2) and Welchs t-test (p0.05). Additionally, DEGs were categorized according to their biological processes using the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) protein classification system (www.pantherdb.org, Mi et al., 2005). The PANTHER system provides probability of each biological process by comparing the DEG list to the reference list containing all the probes present on the array. The over-/down-representation of each biological process is determined by Fishers exact test in combination with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. ly lower than the overall genome. In these regions, the occurrence of CpGs is significantly higher, close to the expected frequency. The existing CpG islands are traditionally thought to be unmethylated. However, many CpG islands were subsequently found to be hypermethylated in the imprinted genes (Jones and Baylin, 2002). It is now known that some CpG islands in non-imprinted regions are also methylated in normal cells and this is believed to be related to tissue-restricted gene expression patterns (Grunau et al., 2000; Song et al., 2005). A large number of methylated CpG islands are also found in tumor cells (Jones and Baylin, 2002).  Most CpG islands are found at significant regions of interest, such as the promoters or 'start' regions of many genes. The CpG islands that are located upstream of the transcription start site are critical in gene expression regulation and cell differentiation (Bird, 2002). They are usually an important signature of the 5' region of many mammalian genes, often overlapping with, or within, a thousand bases downstream of the promoter. The identification of promoters by CpG islands with a resolution of 2 KB may be most useful for large-scale sequence annotation. Visual inspection of CpG islands is often used for gene identification by many molecular biologists. In a word, searching CpG islands are very important from various aspects. In this respect, I developed the CpG islands search tool, CpG Islands Detector, which can be used for CpG islands determination. This tool is a window-based Java application implemented with JBuilder 9.0 which is a Java IDE (Integrated Development Environment). There are several computer programs, including CpG Island Searcher (Takai and Jones, 2002) and CpGIF (Ye et al., 2008), which search genomes for CpG islands and are available on the Web. Their simple and limited interfaces mean that users are unable to capitalize on the programs by using them to find out the best parameters - parameters which would allow users to locate all of the CpG islands and none of the junk.Overview and features of CpG Islands Detector.
The first large-scale computational analysis of CpG islands using vertebrate gene sequences in GenBank was performed by Gardiner-Garden and Frommer in 1987 (Gardiner-Garden and Frommmer, 1987). As defined by Gardiner-Garden and Frommer (Gardiner-Garden and Frommer, 1987), CpG islands are greater than 200 bp in length, have more than 50 percent of G+C content, and have a ratio of CpG frequency to the product of the C and G frequencies above 0.6. Over time, the criteria for a CpG island have evolved. Currently, the generally accepted criteria have become more stringent, requiring a minimum DNA sequence length of 500 bp. The importance of these criteria lies in that they are able to exclude most Alu repeats, which were identified as CpG islands by the old criteria. Takai and Jones proposed more stringent criteria, with GC content and observed CpG/expected CpG ratio (Obs/Exp) increased to 55% and 0.65 respectively, which would be more effective in excluding Alu repeats (Takai and Jones, 2002). The criteria used in this work basically comply with those defined not only by Gardiner-Garden and Frommer but also by Takai and Jones.  In this work, a sliding 200 base pair window algorithm was fundamentally applied to the CpG Islands Detector. Even though the algorithm was designed according to the criteria of CpG islands described by Gardiner- Garden and Frommer, two more parameters - N and V were introduced in this work. N and V mean the number of CpGs in the 200 bp and the value of the gap between successively adjacent CpG islands respectively. N was used to exclude mathematical CpG islands. A 200 bp sequence containing one G, 150?Cs, and only one CpG, which would meet the criteria of a CpG island, can become an example of mathematical CpG islands. That is, there must be at least seven CpGs in 200 bp. This number was selected on the basis that there would be 200/16 (i.e. 12.5) CpGs in a random DNA fragment containing no suppression of CpG. Because Gardiner-Garden and Frommer's criterion of Obs/Exp of 0.6 would accommodate (0.6×12.5) CpGs (i.e., 7.5), seven CpGs were regarded as being a reasonable cutoff. V was adopted to extend single stretch meeting the criteria of CpG island by means of merging two immediately adjacent CpG islands. The CpG search algorithm can be summarized as following (Fig. 1):  (A)Set a sliding window of 200 bp in the beginning of a Contig.  (B)Shift the window 1 bp after evaluation until the window meets the criteria (GC %, Obs/Exp, and, N) of a CpG island.  (C)If the window meets the criteria, shift the window 200 bp, then evaluate again and repeat these 200 bp shifts until the window does not meet the criteria.  (D)If the last window in the step C does not meet the criteria, shift the last window 1 bp toward the 5 end until it meets the criteria.  (E)If the right end of the last window reaches the end of the Contig, go to the step F. Otherwise, set a 200-base window in the position where 3? end of the last window was located and repeat the step B through D.  (F)Two immediately adjacent CpG islands are connected if they are separated by less than V bp and the total stretch to be connected meets the criteria of GC % and Obs/Exp.＋The nuclear genomes of vertebrates are mosaics of isochores, very long stretches (300 kb) of DNA that are homogeneous in nucleotide composition and are compositionally correlated with the coding sequences that they embed. Isochores can be partitioned in a small number of families that cover a range of GC levels, which is narrow in cold-blooded vertebrates, but broad in warm-blooded vertebrates. The GC % plotting can give a clue to discriminating the promoter and coding ctional GT which has a glycosyltransferase domain as well as transpeptidase domain (Terrak et al., 2008). The bifunctional GT class has been thoroughly studied as a target of antibiotics as penicillin is known to bind to the transpeptidase domain of the bifunctional GT or the penicillin-binding protein (Berardino, 1996; Barrett, 2007). Monofunctional biosynthetic peptidoglycan transglycosylase polymerizes disaccharide units to form glycan chains, which are cross-linked by transpeptidase to build the peptidoglycan walls of the bacterial cell (Berardino et al., 1996; Terrak et al., 2008).   MBPT catalyzes the formation of peptidoglycan subunits which consist of two monosaccharides: N-acetylglucosamine (NAG or GlcNAc) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM or MurNAc), that are connected by a (1,4) glycosydic bond (Terrak et al., 2008) (Fig. 1). The NAM monosaccharide has two different peptide moieties which are cross-linked by the transpeptidase enzyme on the C terminal end of the PBP enzyme or by a monofunctional transpeptidase protein such as DD-transpeptidase, DD-carboxypeptidase, and DD-endopeptidase (Ghuysen et al., 1998; Yuan et al., 2007). The NAM peptide chain containing D-alanine, D-glutamic acid, and meso-diaminopimelic acid is present in the thinner cell walled, gram negative bacteria such as Hemophilus influenza. Gram positive bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus have a thicker cell wall as the peptide sequence is: L-alanine, D-glutamine, L-lysine, and D-alanine. MBPT links the nucleophilic hydroxyl group on the fourth carbon of the NAG moiety to the electrophilic carbon with the protruding diphospholipid chain of the NAM moiety (Yuan et al., 2007). An over expression of the MBPT gene, mgt, causes an increase in the formation of the peptidoglycan subunits, in vitro, as further work can be done to analyze the precise lengths of the glycan chain created by monofunctional and bifunctional transpeptidase which may infer further differences between infectious and non infectious bacteria (Di Berardino et al., 1996). The generation of MBPT from the mgt gene also gives MBPT its own identity separate from the bi-functional PBP which is transcribed from the pbp gene even though both enzymes share a great deal of homology in their respective PGT domains (Barrett, 2007; DiBerardi et al., 1996; Paik et al., 1997; Spratt et al., 2006). Bioinformatic analysis of the monofunctional transpeptidase protein may provide further insight into the actions of infectious bacteria especially in comparison to MBPT and PBP. The precise role of each peptidoglycan synthesizing enzyme is still unknown as it is possible that the biosynthesis, repair, and upkeep of the cell wall is so vital that each enzyme may be called upon for a different reason be it synthesizing a new cell wall, repairing the cell wall, or fixing mistakes in the structure of the cell wall all of which are similar to the role of polymerases in DNA construction. Though the two proteins have similar roles, structures, and domains (PGT), MBPT is present in a great many more bacteria than PBP with a wide variety of habitats as well as forms of infection suggesting that MBPT may play a key role in the biosynthesis of the cell wall in a majority of bacteria and a new source of differentiation in the pathology of bacteria.   Bacterial pathogenicity has been one of the highly studied fields for obvious reasons and has lead to the identification of a variety of virulence factors such as adhesion molecules, metabolic enzymes, and toxins, which take advantage of a hosts resources to allow the infectious bacteria to multiply and spread (Yang et al., 2008). The degree of infection and its aggressiveness can be defined by the infectious bacteria’s virulence which gages the potency of an infectious agent based on its ability to invade the hosts system and induce disease. An infectious agent has to be able to penetrate the hosts immune system and find an area in the host to multiply which is predicated on the infectious bacterias mode of conveyance as well as the makeup of the cells surface. The role of PBP has been deeply studied as it has been traditionally targeted by a variety of antibiotics giving it the name, penicillin binding protein (Suginaka et al., 2007). A number of sequenced genomes from a variety of bacterial species indicate that a majority of bacterial species have acquired genes via horizontal gene transfer which allows them to be better suited to survive in certain environmental conditions or niches (Schmidt and Hensel, 2004). Horizontal gene transfer can be achieved through a variety of mechanisms including natural transformation (Schmidt and Hensel, 2004), an exchange of plasmids and pathogenicity islands by way of conjugation (Schierack et al., 2006) as well as transduction by bacteriophages (Wagner and Waldor, 2002). Evolutionary differences between infectious and non infectious bacteria are apparent in their protein sequences as the two factions continue to separate from one another and exploit new environments for species proliferation. The purpose of this article is to analyze MBPT sequences derived from infectious and non 6) (Latting et al., 2008). Gap junction -2 protein, commonly known as connexin 26 (Cx26), belongs to a family of structurally related transmembrane proteins that mediate intracellular transport of various ions and molecules (Sosinsky, 1995). Various connexin proteins assemble with each other and form gap junctions. Gap junctions are the clusters of intercellular channels involved in direct communication between cells. GJB2 mutations result in altered protein sequences. Alterations in the protein sequence are the predominant cause of inherited, sensorineural deafness (Zelante et al., 1997).  Immunohistochemistry of inner ear tissues has shown that connexin 26 and connexin 30 colocalize (Forge et al., 2002; Lautermann et al., 1998). Connexin 26 has a structural resemblance to innexins that form gap junctions in invertebrates but has quite a different protein sequence. The molecular weight of connexin is about 26 KDa, a product of the GJB2 gene. Connexin exists in a dynamic cycle of synthesis and replacement because of a short life span of a few hours (Musil, et al., 1993). Connexin 26 is found in cells throughout the body, particularly in the inner ear and the skin, and permits the transport of potassium ions and small molecules in neighboring cells (Castillo et al., 2005). Its presence in the cochlea is associated with hearing.   GJB2 mutations are the cause of recessive and dominant forms of deafness (Laer et al., 2001), affecting 1 in 1000 children (Bitner-Glindzicz, 2002). About 20 mutations of gap junction -2 have been described as being related to diseases (Abe et al., 2000) and various syndromes, such as Bart-Pumphrey Syndrome, Keratitis- Ichthyosis-Deafness Syndrome, and Vohwinkel Syndrome. (Richard et al., 2004; Snoeckx et al., 2005; Yotsumoto et al., 2003). The mutations alter the amino acid sequence of connexin 26 and result in impaired functioning of the protein associated with ion channels, especially. In fact, a range of phenotypic presentations of autosomal dominant and recessive gap junction -2 gene mutations are intriguing. Such mutations result in an unstable or malformed protein, unable to form gap junctions, or they result in a modified protein that builds dysfunctional gap junctions. So, the falsified or modified connexin 26 curbs the normal arrangement of gap junc-tions and, hence, their proper functioning, affecting the transition of sound waves to neural impulses.   So, the present study was carried out to highlight the structural changes, especially the hydrogen bonding, bond angles, bond length, force field energies, and PI values, because such forces and factors are considered to be contributing to the effect on amino acid residues, their stability, and normal functioning (Karaguller et al., 2004; Talley et al., 2008). βThe X-ray crystallographic structure of connexin 26 is not known. But, the protein sequence and basic protein structure are known and well characterized (Fig. 1).Methods.
Sequence Analysis: The primary sequence of human connexin 26 (primary accession no. P29033) was retrieved from SWISS-Prot (Bairoch and Apweiler, 1997). Using in silico tools, a theoretically designed homology model (1xir) was obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB). Homology modeling can be described in four steps: (A) identification of a homolog from PDB whose structure is known; (B) alignment/positioning of our query sequence to the template or model sequence; (C) construction of the replica/model based on the alignment; and (D) entrance and refinement of the model. A sequence similarity of 30% to a known protein structure being often predicted and is equivalent to a low-resolution X-ray structure (Xiang, 2006). The 3D coordinates of the template used were available.By using Swiss Protein Deep Viewer, various structural implementations were carried out from the coordinate file for the selected amino acids-Asp66His, Asn54Lys, and Asp50Asn-involved in obvious clinical syndromes (Fig. 1). Asp66, Asn54, and Asp50 were mutated to His66, Asn54, and Asp50, respectively, and a study was carried out to observe changes in hydrogen bonds, bond lengths, angles, and rotations. Energy calculations for wild-type and mutated amino acids were made by using the GROMOSS96 implementation of the Swiss Protein Deep Viewer. The PI values of the individual amino acid residues, wild-type and mutant, were compared on the basis of an available table (Williams et al., 1987).Results.
In nature, a protein is stabilized by protein folds into one or more specific conformations to perform biological functions. The specific conformations are driven by various interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, bond angles, and various forces. The 226 amino acids of connexin 26 are known. The 3D structure of connexin 26 is well known and was obtained from Protein Data Bank. Mutations in the gap junction -2 gene cause a substitution of different amino acids of connexin 26 and result in various syndromes. In the present work, 3 amino acids of the E1 domain of the protein were selected to determine the characteristic changes affecting the physiology of connexin 26 (Fig. 2).Asp66His causes a hydrogen bond breakage to Asn62 (Table 1), resulting in a significant increase in energy for bonds (18.494 KJ/mol for mutant compared to 5.516 KJ/mol for wild-type). The angular energy increased by 2.457 KJ/mol for His66. The CG1-CB1 rotation for His66 changed the CA1-CB1-CG1 angle from 108.76 for the wild-type to 115.05 for the mutated amino acid (Table 2). The CG1-CB1 bond rotation disturbs the existing hydrogen bond (2.67 ) to Asn62 (Fig. 2A, 2B). The aromatic ring of His66 reduces the distance to Pro70 (CD1-CB1 distance, 4.98 for wild-type to CE11-CG1 4.06 bond length for the mutation). Another important change observed is the shift in normal charges of the residue from negative to positive, with the increase in PI m spectrum disorders (ASDs) are complex neurodevelopmental disorders with the core features of impairment in social interaction and verbal communication and repetitive or stereotyped patterns in behavior. These disorders typically manifest within the first three years of life (Klauck, 2006). The etiology of ASD is still largely unknown. Growing evidence has suggested a genetic background of ASD development. The concordance rates of ASD in monozygotic twins were reported to be significantly higher than in dizygotic twins, and the recurrence rates in siblings are approximately 10 times higher than in the normal population (Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley, 2001). Cytogenetic alterations were detected in 7.4% of ASDs (Vorstman et al., 2006), and some alterations have been suggested as causative factors of neurodevelopmental disorders (Merikangas et al., 2009). Several studies have revealed that ASDs are associated with genetic factors, such as single gene disorders and genetic polymorphisms, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variation (CNV), and that multiple genetic factors may work together (McCauley et al., 2005; Santangelo and Tsatsanis, 2005). Significant associations have been reported between ASDs and CNVs of various genes, such as NLGN3 (Xq13.1), NLGN4 (Xp22.23), SHANK3 (22q13.3), and NRXN1 (2p16.3) (Christian et al., 2008; Cook et al., 2008). However, most of these candidate genes have been neither successfully replicated in independent study populations nor functionally validated as susceptible genes or loci.   Maintaining neuronal cellular connectivity as well as synaptogenesis has been suggested to play a role in the pathologensis of ASD by trafficking of immune cells and mediators through astroglial and microglial cells (Gupta, 2000). T cell receptor beta affects TCR signaling and T cell polarity (McKinney et al., 2010), which consequently affect neuronal activity, development, and plasticity (Syken and Shatz, 2003). Several association studies reported that an imbalance of the CD4:CD8 T cell ratio was found in children with ASDs (Denny et al., 1996; Sweeten et al., 2003).   Another interesting clue to connect the TCR with ASD is that the 7q34-35 region, where the T cell receptor B variable region (TCRB) is located, was found to be rearranged in a patient with mental retardation, anxiety disorder, and autistic features (Dauwerse et al., 2010). In previous reports, the 7q31-34 (Risch et al., 1999) and 7q32.3-36.3 (Schanen, 2006) regions showed association with mental retardation and ASD phenotypic features (Dauwerse et al., 2010; Gu and Lupski, 2008). Based on these reports, it seems that TCRB may affect the susceptibility to neurodevelopmental disorders, including ASD.   In this study, we analyzed 163 ASD subjects and 97 normal controls by genomic quantitative PCR (qPCR) to evaluate the association between the 7q34 locus, harboring the TCRB region, and ASDs and the potential diagnostic usefulness of TCRB in the Korean population.Methods .
We recruited 163 ASD children (137 boys and 26 girls) who were diagnosed with ASD from the Department of Child Psychiatry of Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Ghil Hospital and Seoul National University Hospital. Each proband with ASD was initially screened by two board-certified child psychiatrists according to DSM-IV criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) and assessed using the Autism Diagnostic Interview- Revised (ADI-R) and the Korean version of the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). Probands with chromosomal abnormalities, such as fragile X syndrome or other neurological or medical conditions suspected to be associated with ASDs, were not included. All parents or legal guardians of probands provided written informed consent for participation in this study. The normal control samples consisted of 97 Korean adult males who were free of any psychiatric or congenital disorders. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the participating institutions. oven to have superior meat quality are not able to used directly for breeding programs. DNA marker technology enables the pig breeder to monitor and predict the molecular breeding value of the meat quality without slaughtering animals.   For identification of genetic loci or DNA markers affecting pork quality, many reference pig families were generated and then analyzed for association between pork quality phenotypes and genotypes (Rothschild et al., 2007). A substantial number of candidate genes have shown significant associations with many traits important to swine production. Two biological candidate genes (ESR and PRLR) have shown significant association with litter size (Short et al., 1997; Tomas et al., 2006). An MC4R mutation has shown a significant reduction in feed intake with less fat deposition (Kim et al., 2000a; Kim et al., 2004). Additional important genes, PRKAG3 and CAST, have been shown to be associated with changes in pH and tenderness (Ernst et al., 1998; Ciobanu et al., 2001). Therefore, in this study, genotyping and association analyses of 5 SNPs in the aforementioned genes were investigated in pig reference families generated from Korean native pig (KNP)-crossed Yorkshire (YS) breeds, with the objective to evaluate KNP x YS families as a reference population for exploring and identifying genetic markers to select breeding animals with superior pork quality and to understand genomic mechanisms underlying pork quality variation between KNP and YS. Methods.
A three-generation resource population was developed from reciprocal crosses between the Korean native pig (KNP) and Yorkshire (YS) breeds at Chungbuk National University. The F1 crossbreeds were produced from two purebred KNP boars crossed with five purebred YS sows (F1: KY) as well as three purebred YS boars crossed with 14 purebred KNP sows (F1: YK). Randomly selected F1 crossbreds mated to produce F2 animals using the following three mating systems: 1) 11 YK boars were intercrossed with 46 YK sows (YK×YK); 2) 5 KY boars were intercrossed with 19 KY sows (KY×KY); and 3) 5 KY boars were intercrossed with 7 YK sows (KY×YK). The F2 pigs were raised under the same feeding and management practices, and in total, 750 pigs were performance-tested and 349 randomly selected pigs were slaughtered at age 190240 days (90110 kg live weight) to assess the meat quality traits. The meat quality traits included crude ash (Cash), crude protein (Cpro), crude lipid (intramuscular fat, IMF), drip loss (DL), water holding capacity (WHC), moisture, cooking loss (CL), shear force (shearforce), pH at 24 hrs (pH), color score, marbling score, tenderness, juiciness, flavor, and total cholesterol (Table 1). These traits were measured according to standard methods (Oh et al., 2008).A total of 5 candidate gene polymorphisms were previously reported, and detailed information about these SNPs and their respective PCR_RFLP genotyping approaches is illustrated in Table 2. Polymerase chain reactions were performed in 10l volumes, containing 12 ng of genomic DNA, 10 pmol of each primer, 200 M of each dNTP, 2.5 units of Taq DNA polymerase (Solgent, Korea), and reaction buffer with 1.5 mM MgCl. The thermocycling reaction was performed in a PTC-200 thermocycler (MJ Research, Watertown, MA, USA) with a 10-min initial denaturation at 95C; 40 cycles of 95C for 30 s, 4565C for 30 s, and 72C for 40 s; and a final extension at 72C for 5 min. The result of the PCR reaction was identified by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis at 100 mV for 20 min. The information for each primer sequence, annealing temperature, and fragment size is given in Table 2. All restriction enzymes were supplied by New England BioLabs (Ipswich, MA, USA), and restriction digests were performed according to the manufacturers recommendations. Digested PCR products were analyzed on 2.54% agarose gels, and each allele was scored manually. The restriction enzymes and polymorphic fragment sizes used for SNP genotyping are given in Table 2. 