
=============제목==========
The Korean Pharmacogenomic Database at NIFDS: 2008 Update.
=============교신저자==========
*Corresponding author: E-mail mwchung@kfda.go.krTel +82-2-380-1807, Fax +82-2-388-6458Accepted 24 July 2009
===========저자==========
T.S. Kang1, S.W. Woo2, H.J. Park1, S.Y. Han1, M.H. Park1 and M.W. Chung1*1Clinical Research Division, Toxicological Evaluation and Research Department, Korea Food and Drug Admini-stration, Seoul 122-704, Korea, 2Pharmaceutical Mana-gement Division, Korea Food and Drug Administration, Seoul 122-704, Korea
===========키워드==========
Keywords: database, Korean people, pharmacogeno-micsKeywords: bioinformatics, computer-aided design, meta-bolic pathway visualization, systems biologyKeywords: BIRC5, survivin, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hep-atocellular carcinoma (HCC), liver cirrhosis (LC), poly-morphism
===========소제목==========
Abstract	Introduction	Methods	Results	Discussion	Overview of the System	Discussion and Future Direction	References	J2.5dPathway Browser Architecture	Implementation	Features and Results	Discussion	References	Overview of the System	Discussion	References	Introduction	Methods	Results	Introduction	Methods	Methods	Results	Methods	Results and Discussion	
===========소소제목==========
Database Organization	Drug and label information	Quality Assurance	Data field additions	Expanded database size and coverage	AMapping of the trans-splicing ribozyme 	Ribozyme-accessible uridines in mDMPK 3	-UTR RNA	Subjects	Sequence analysis of the human CYP2E1	Genoyping with Fluorescence Polarization Detec-tion	Statistics	Study population and outcomes	Sequence analysis of the human BIRC5	Genotyping with fluorescence polarization detec-tion	Statistics	Yeast strains, medium and reagents	Quantitative proteomic analysis using a multi-label microplate reader	GFP-intensity data processing and analysis	Measuring protein abundance changes induced by rapamycin using a multilabel microplate reader	Comparison of protein abundance changes with mRNA level changes	Functional classification of 37 proteins showing changes in the protein and mRNA level by rapa-mycin	Implementation	A
===========본문==========
Abstract.
Since its first release in 2007, the National Institute of Food and Drug Safety Evaluation (NIFDS) has provided pharmacogenomic and comparative information specific to Koreans to allow regulatory reviewers and researchers to adapt their working practices to pharmacogenomics. The highlights of this years additions include "Drug Information", "Gene Information" and "Pharmacogenomic information in the drug labels" sections. These new additions provide information on 737 genes, 719 drugs and pharmacogenomic data of the labels or relabels of 253 approved drugs as of November 2008. The latest version of the Korean Pharmacogenomic Database (KPD, release 2.0) has expanded significantly since its previous release. More SNP and haplotype information has been added to the database with the latest version of the KPD containing approximately four times as many SNPs and haplotypes than the previous version (719 vs. 152, and 30 vs. 7 respectively). Through the "SNP" and "Haplotype" sections, the KPD provides unique Korean SNP and haplotype information as well as comparative information of other populations (Japanese, Chinese, European, African) to offer a range of pharmacogenomic data that can help reviewers and the public understand pharmacogenomic information. The quality and quantity of information in the KPD has also been improved considerably. This data can be found at: http://www.nitr.go.kr/nitr/contents/m134700/view.do/.IIntroduction.
The Internet is an ideal platform for storing, providing and exchanging large-scale genetic information, and there are a large number of web-based bioinformatics sites worldwide. These databases are operated by many organizations for a variety of purposes, and offer huge volumes of information online for public access (Chang Kug Kim 2009; Hongseok Tae 2009; Innocenti 2005; Werner Kalow 2002).  The most well-known pharmacogenomic information database is the Pharmacogenetics and Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB, www.pharmGKB. org), which is the most comprehensive pharmacogenomic information database in the world. The PharmGKB provides information on genotypes, molecular and functional assays, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, and clinical outcomes to those involved in pharmacogenomic research (Innocenti 2005).   However, this database contains a wide range of information, and beginners can find it difficult to obtain the required data from this information labyrinth. First-time visiting researchers find it extremely difficult to locate the desired information on the PharmGKB. There are no databases that provide unique Korean information on the SNP and Haplotypes in drug-metabolism-related genes. In addition, there is no information on the relationships between particular SNPs and the drug metabolism, which can be used to identify candidate genes affecting disease progression or drug reactions.  The Korean Pharmacogenomic database (KPD) was developed to allow easier searches for Korean Pharmacogenomic information (Tae Sun Kang et al., 2008), and is located at the National Institute of Food and Drug Safety Evaluation (NIFDS) homepage. When the KPD was first released in 2007, it offered the selected and specialized data (mainly SNP and haplotype information in liver metabolizing enzymes, trasporters and receptors). For the convenience of the public, researchers and scientific reviewer, link functions to major intermational databases (NCBI, dbSNP database, and PharmGKB) were established in the KPD.  Since its first release, the KPD has been used in a wide range of applications including drug evaluations, selection of SNPs in Koreans and general pharmacogenomic education. The KPD is being updated con-tinuously to provide more practical pharmacogenomic information for drug evaluations. This paper reports these developments as well as the many additions and improvements appearing in the latest version of the KPD (release 2.0)Methods.
Oracle 10g was used for database management system and the interface between database and web was implemented on JAVA/JSP. Details related to the genotype information, linkage disequilibrium blocks, haplotype structures and database organization on the KPD have been described previously (Tae Sun Kang et al., 2008). Drug and pharmacogenomic information in drug label were obtained from the Physicians Desk Reference (2007) for the U.S.A, the National Health Service homepage (http://emc.medicines.org.uk/) for the U.K, Drugs in Japan (2007) for Japan and DIMS and EZDRUG for Korea respectively.For completeness of the database, each data used in the KPD is entered or prepared by one menber of the clinical research division in NIFDS and separately validated by second member of the clinical research division. Additional spot checks are routinely performed on each entry by senior members of the review group, including two phamacists, a statistician and a PhD-level genetist.Results.
The KPD was developed to collect genetic information unique to the Korean population, and to allow easy information searches within the numerous databases available. It is also expected to act as a bridge that facilitates easier information gathering through links to larger databases that provide more precise information. With the increasing need to provide more practical information to evaluate drugs as well as educate scientific reviewers and the public, three new data field additions have been added and database size and coverage has been expanded.As shown in Table 1, the KPD has three new additions. Gene Information sectionThe Gene information section was established to provide information on genes, such as those encoding the major drug-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, and receptors, which can affect the drug response (adverse effects and efficacy), based on the SNPs provided in the "SNP information" section. A total of 737 genes are arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant genes is recorded next to each entry. This section also offers detailed information on the summary, key pathways, drug and substrates, important variants and important haplotypes of each gene (Fig. 1). For those who require more specialized information on each gene, quality information is provided by links to the PharmGKB database (www.pharmGKB. org), the UCSC Genome Bioinformatics (http://genome. ucsc.edu) and the OMIM at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=omim) sites.Drug Information sectionThe "Drug Information" section was established to provide drug information, based on the drugs provided in the "Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels" section. A total of 592 drugs have been arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant drugs is recorded next to each entry. This section also offers detailed information on the molecular weight, indications, mechanisms of action, absorption data, distribution data, protein binding data, biotransformation data, half life, elimination data, adverse effects and interactions of each drug (Fig. 1). Those requiring more specialized information on each drug can obtain it via links to the PharmGKB database (www. pharmGKB.org/) site.Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels sectionThe "Pharmacogenomic Information in the drug labels" section was established to provide information on the use of pharmacogenomic data in drug labels and relabels in Korea and foreign countries. A total of 253 approved drugs have been arranged in alphabetical order to allow easy access, and the number of relevant drugs is recorded next to each entry. This section allows detailed use of the pharmacogenomic data listed in the Physicians' Desk Reference. Through Valid Biomarker (V.B.) information, pharmacogenomic data in the drug labels and relabels in Korea can be compared with those of other regulations (the U.S.A, the U.K and Japan) (Fig. 1).Table 1 shows a detailed comparison of KPD release 1.0 with KPD release 2.0. The latest release of the KPD has detailed information on the SNPs of a total of 719 genes. Comparisons of the SNP frequencies in the Korean population with those of other races registered in the International HapMap database (Europeans, Chinese, Japanese, and African) are also provided.   The "haplotype information" section has been also updated to provide information on 10 unique Korean haplotypes. Korean linkage disequilibrium block data for the genes encoding the major metabolic-enzymes is included. The blocks comprise the SNPs with minor allele frequency (MAF) values 5% using the Gabriel method in the Haploview 3.32 program (Ardlie, Kruglyak and Seielstad 2002; Barrett, Fry, Maller and Daly 2005). The haplotype frequencies of the major liver metabolic-enzymes for the Korean population can be compared with those of other races registered in the International HapMap (Europeans, Chinese, Japanese, and African). In addition, the latest version contains approximately four times as much pharmacogenomic information as the previous release (30 versus 7) through the "Pharmacogenomic Information and Education" facility within the KPD.Discussion.
NIFDS has been operating the KPD with the main aim of offering users a “bridging” function to simplify the search for useful information. The KPD has systematically collected and maintained unique Korean pharmacogenomic information from literatures and other databases and provided scientic reviewers and researchers with the selected data. Since its first release, the KPD has provided data on Korean single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes. It also allows a comparison of the Korean SNP and haplotype frequencies with those of the other ethnic groups registered in the International HapMap (Thorisson, Smith, Krishnan and Stein 2005). The KPD is focused primarily on providing the detailed pharmacogenomic data needed to facilitate drug evaluation. Therefore, in the latest version, three new additions ("Gene Information" section, "Drug Information" section and "Pharmacogenomic information in the drug labels" section) were established, and the data coverage and database linkages were expanded to provide more practical pharmacogenomic information for drug evaluations. These new additions provide scientific reviewers and the general public with the concise information needed to understand ethnic differences and evaluate bridging studies. It is also expected to be useful for finding unique Korean Pharmacogenomic data without the need to search other databases. The KPD contains extensive links to almost all major bioinformatics and pharmacogenomic databases (the dbSNP and OMIM at NCBI, PharmGKB and UCSC sites) (Karolchik et al., 2008; Kuhn et al., 2007; Kuhn et al., 2009; Wheeler et al., 2008). Through these links, the KPD provides convenient search functions to obtain more precise information with just a single mouse click.What is the most important thing is to update the database with the lastst pharcogenomic data on a constant basis in order to maintain the KPD effectively. Local expert organizations and networks are needed to guarantee the reliability of the pharmacogenomic information contained in the database. In order to ensure that the KPD is used effectively by scientific reviewers and the general public, the types of visitors to the site must be assessed and the database must be upgraded periodically to reflect the demands of the major visiting population. Overall, it is expected that the KPD will serve as a useful resource to both scientific reviewers and the general public.system or the source code for possible collaboration.OOverview of the System.
CAD (Computer-Aided Design) has been traditionally used to assist in modeling in various fields, and advances in the biological community have created new uses for CAD with many novel biomedical applications (Demir et al., 2002; Holford et al., 2005; Sorokin et al., 2006; Sun, 2005). Especially, CAD can be a visualization gateway to gather numerous biological pathway resources, not only from biological pathway databases but also from static images and research articles.  The PPE (Pyrus Pathway Editor) system, a Java- based visual tool for drawing and annotating biological pathways, is described in this paper. It is a graphical editor for biological pathways, and it integrates the pathway image and XML file source. Fig. 1 shows a snapshot of the PPE system.  The PPE window contains a menu bar, tool bar, status bar, and a progress bar at the top of the screen. Windows can be dragged around the screen and resized. The tool bar contains tools for making selections, for zooming and scrolling images, and for changing the drawing color. The status bar, when the cursor is over an image, displays pixel coordinates and values. The progress bar shows the progress of time- consuming operations. PPE provides several common visual notations but also allows the user to define his own notations. The shape menu in the left window, in Fig. 1, can be used to select the shapes of the biological nodes. Users can annotate map elements with biological information or link them to external databases. The File/Import submenu provides access to plug-ins for reading XML files and for loading images. Thus, maps can be drawn in several modes.  First, they can be imported from external XML file sources and laid out in the editor window, as in Fig. 1. In the case that layout information is not provided in the XML file, an automatic layout module will be applied to display biological pathways.  Second, it allows a user to import external image sources, process the image, convert the processed image into an XML format, and finally generate maps in the editor window. The File/Open command opens TIFF, GIF, and JPEG images. There are some excellent image sources, ranging from image pathway databases, such as KEGG (http://www.kegg.org/) and BioCARTA (http:// www.biocarta.com), to images in numerous biological textbooks, research papers, and websites. These external images are initially displayed in additional windows below the main editing window, as in Fig. 2a. They will be semiautomatically processed, converted into an XML format, and displayed in the main editing window, as in Fig. 2b. Each node and edge in the original image has to be confirmed by a user, one by one; double-clicking on any line or image nodes in the bottom window will result in the Object in the editor window. By selecting an appropriate node type from the pop-up window, the user can create a new object in the main window. The types and shapes of nodes are predefined. The node types include protein-node, chemical compound-node, DNA-node, RNA-node, enzyme- node, and others. In addition, users can define their own node type. By selecting the exact concept from the pop-up menu, the user can specify an  appropriate edge type, too.Discussion and Future Direction.
KEGG and BioCARTA visualize pathways in a static way. Pathway diagrams are manually drawn and stored as bitmap image files. While this visualization style offers good pathway representation, it does not provide the facilities to create and visualize dynamic pathways. Fortunately, KEGG also provides XML files. In the case that layout information is not provided in the XML file, an automatic layout module will be applied to display biological pathways. However, there are cases in which XML files are not provided in many other databases. In this case, we have to convert an image file directly to an XML file.  In this paper, a computer-aided approach to modify biological pathways, both in image and XML file format, is presented. To the best of our knowledge, we have not found any attempt to process biological pathway images within the CAD environment. However, there are some thorny issues that need to be solved to fully automate this process. Especially, an optical character recognition module should be added in the future to recognize characters in the image. Currently, the characters in the original images are filtered out, and the names and types of each node are manually annotated by humans in a later process, as in Fig. 3. Once the characters can be recognized, the naming process of each node, by human intervention, can be fully automated in the majority of cases.References.
The pathway editor: a tool for managing complex biological networks. IBM J. Res. Dev. 50, 561-573. 3D space offers less constraints on the topology and helps to avoid such unaesthetic graph elements as line crossing. The extra dimension gives greater flexibility for placing nodes and edges in the network.   Despite all these merits, only a few tools offer three-dimensional visualizations. The problem is that, the resultant 3D images of computer graphics are rendered in a 2D media. Therefore, making use of higher dimensions is rather difficult for users generally viewing the network on a two-dimensional screen.  An alternative approach to three-dimensional graph visualization would be to present only interesting subtrees in different layers, originated from the basic 2D graph visualization. This scheme helps when there is a possibility to group multiple nodes to a hyper-node to reduce complexity as well as to hide nodes that are not of interest.   This paper presents a visual Java-based tool for drawing and annotating biological pathways in two- and-a-half-dimensions (2.5D) as an alternative to the existing two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) presentations, where two and a half dimension is an informal term used to describe visual phenomena which is actually 2D with 3D looking graphics (Baur et al., 2004; Song et al., 2009). Such visualization allows user to see a detailed view of an objects in focus and its place in the context of the whole system.J2.5dPathway Browser Architecture.
The J2.5DPathway Browser Tool is a tool that hierarchically lists the pathways and super nodes. The system provides a visual interface to biomedical pathways. It is basically a graph visualization tool. An XML-format input data may come from web services (e.g., KEGG: http:// www.genome.jp/kegg/soap/) after the user chooses to view the selected pathway from the J2.5DPathway, or it may come from other file formats, which were locally saved.   J2.5DPathway consists of four major modules: (1) graphical user interface (GUI), (2) two-dimensional representation, (3) two-and-a-half dimensional representation, and (4) layout optimizer. The layout optimizer module permits user to optimize the appearance of a graph. Implemented data structures are based on an ontology model designed specifically for metabolic pathways.  The GUI module comprises of a set of tools for facilitating interaction between the system and the user (see Fig. 2). The screen of J2.5dPathway system consists of Views. The tool-bar menu at the top lists various tool icons. Most of the functions of the tool icons are self-explanatory. For example, clicking the Magnifying Glass tool manipulates the View to zoom in or out. Pathways will be initially displayed in the main window in the middle. Below the main window, a table lists all the nodes in the pathways. The interested nodes can be selected, by clicking the elements in the table. To allow user to view several different groups of nodes, selected nodes will be displayed in different parallel planes, however with interdependent layouts. In the case user wants to create a new plane, he or she may set the plane number to a value greater than one.  Alternatively, a feature of selecting nodes of interest is also available by clicking and dragging a rectangular or circular area on the 2D plane. This is possible because J2.5dPathway is an extended version of J2dPathway (Song et al., 2008).  J2dPathway has a feature to select arbitrary nodes and abstracts them into a single node. One can select several nodes by dragging the mouse and turn them into a single super node. These abstracted nodes are displayed in a different plane, in a consequent process.   For example, the selected nodes (the red nodes) in Fig. 3 are abstracted into a single super node (Song et al., 2008) in J2dPathway environment. However, the selected nodes in the original 2D visualization are displayed in a different plane in J2.5dPathway environment. The transformed two-and-a-half dimensional representation and the original two dimensional representations are basically consistent with each other.Implementation.
Our application was developed based on Java 3D classes and methods, importing from javax.media.j3d (see Fig. 4). It is implemented based on Java 3D API (http://java.sun.com/javase/technologies/desktop/java3d/) and OpenGL (http://www.opengl.org/about/overview/) technologies, the premier environment for developing portable, interactive 3D graphics applications. To run the J2.5dPathway system, the graph library yFiles should be also installed on user’s local computer (Wiese et al., 2000). local database features for saving and searching the searched results. Users can import and update the major databases with Windows interfaces and can manipulate their own local databases with searched results.Features and Results.
The detailed features of WinBioDBs are as follows.  Windows program   supporting the search of 10 major biological databases (Table 1) including large databases like GenBank  searching and formatting the results  local databases for the searched results  editing and searching local databases  customization of search conditions for each database  customization of output fields for each database  project features - multiple local databases  updating public DB  backup of local databases  The database schema of WinBioDBs is a little complicated (Fig. 1) to support the complicated features (Fig. 2). Database information table is a meta table and each of 10 major public databases constructs a public DB table and a private DB table.Discussion.
WinBioDB is a Windows program with diverse and unique features as a PC-based program. With more practical requirements through user tests, it will be upgraded to a more useful database program. It could include more public databases and could be integrated with analysis programs.  As WinBioDBs use MySQL as its database engine, the server version programs can be easily constructed by just changing the database server while using its Windows interfaces.References.
 The protein information resource (PIR). Nucl. Acids Res. 28, 41-44. The Pfam Protein Families Database. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, D138-D141. GenBank: update. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, 23-26.Recent improvements to the PROSITE database. Nucl. Acids Res. 32, D134-D137. have been developed for primer design and probe design. Some programs such as PCR Suite (van Baren, 2004) and BatchPrimer3 (You, 2004) provide user-friendly Primer3 interfaces including web-based environment. Some programs have been developed for designing very specific primers (Moro, 2009). iCODEHOP (Boyce, 2009) uses multialignment result from ClustalW. Genomemasker (Andreson, 2006) and UniPrime (Boutros, 2009) treat genome sequences for primer design.  We have developed COCAW (Comparative Observer for Conserved Areas among Whole genomes), which has web interfaces for the input of multiple genomes and the output of graphical display of detected conserved regions.Overview of the System.
Fig.1 shows the general algorithm of COCAW. Common k-mer patterns are detected in genomes as seed patterns for finding out the candidates of conserved pair regions. To select comparison regions instead of com-paring whole genomes, the information entropy for each k-mer is calculated against whole genomes. After selecting the regions to be compared based on the information entropy, local alignment is calculated to detect final conserved pair regions.  Fig. 2 shows the main web interface of COCAW. Inputs are (a)(d) including a reference genome, compared genomes, the comparison range of the reference genome, and tolerance value of the information entropy comparison. And the detected conserved regions are displayed at (e)(f). The right shot shows an example of the summary of the searched result, where one genome has a similar region with the reference genome and no similar regions are found between the reference genome and other genomes.  Fig. 3 shows the running time analysis of COCAW. X-axis indicates the number of genomes and Y-axis indicates the running time. And multiple plots for error cutoffs of information entropy are displayed. While the running time increases rapidly by the number of compared genomes, it is still very practical for conserved region analysis of species and genus.Discussion.
COCAW is a tool for scanning multiple genomes for conserved regions and it could be useful for genome-wide detection of the patterns as probes among a group of genomes. Currently it shows the detected conserved regions with a little graphical interface, and it will be upgraded for more practical and informational interface especially for multiple genome processing.  COCAW finds out conserved regions among multiple genomes. As a group-specific pattern is an exclusively conserved region, it is not only conserved in the group but also should not be in other genomes. So for detecting very strict group specific patterns, more complicated and time-consuming processes are additionally required.  More practical algorithms should be developed for massive number of genomes with practical user interfaces for diverse applications.References.
. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25, 3389-3402.. New design strategy for development of specific primer sets for PCR-based detection of Chlorophyceae and Bacillariophyceae in environmental samples. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75, 5729-5733.tional to the number of the expanded CTG repeats. The number of repeats is in the range of 5-35 in the normal population, and DM alleles harbor more than 50 and up to several thousand repeats in DM1 patients. The pathogenesis of DM1 is directly mediated by a toxic mDMPK RNA that is entrapped in the affected cell nucleus. A number of pieces of evidence suggest that pleiotropic effects of aberrant interactions between the mDMPK transcripts that are retained in the nucleus and RNA- binding proteins, such as muscleblind-like 1, change the metabolism of target mRNAs, including splicing (Wheeler, 2008). Additively, decreased DMPK protein levels in DM1 patients due to loss of cytoplasm-localized mRNA for translation could cause physiological and functional alterations in phosphorylation of target proteins, including CUG-binding protein 1, and hence has been suggested as a contributor to the pathology of the disease (Kaliman and Llagostera, 2008).   There is no cure for DM yet. However, several approaches to reduce the mutant RNA-mediated toxicity through elimination of nucleus-trapped toxic mDMPK transcripts have been proposed as specific therapies for reversal of the disease phenotype. They include approaches with antisense, small catalytic RNA, or siRNA, which can reduce the level of mDMPK RNA by directly targeting the expanded CUG repeats of the mDMPK transcript (Furling et al., 2003; Krol et al., 2007; Langlois et al., 2003; Mahadevan et al., 2006). However, high specificity for degradation of the mutant alleles, nontoxicity, and lack of off-target effects will be required to minimize nonspecific reduction of the normal allele and cellular toxicity. RNA repair or RNA replacement has been described as a new approach to human gene therapy against genetic disorders, which relies on the Tetrahymena group I-based trans-splicing ribozyme (Sullenger and Gilboa, 2002). This ribozyme could cleave a target 5-exon RNA and trans-ligate an exon that is tagged at its 3-end onto the cleaved target RNA both in vitro and in bacteria and mammalian cells (Been and Cech, 1986; Sullenger and Cech, 1994; Jones et al., 2006). Therefore, the trans-splicing ribozyme can reduce the level of a specific target RNA and simultaneously induce transgene activity specifically in the target RNA- expressing cells. Indeed, trans-splicing ribozymes have been successfully developed to replace mutant transcripts that are associated with several human genetically inherited diseases, including DM1 (Lan et al., 1998; Phylactou et al. 1998; Rogers et al., 2002). Moreover, we have shown that trans-splicing ribozyme targeting and replacing the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) RNA could specifically and efficiently regress human tumors not only in cell cultures but also in animals without any toxicity in normal tissues or any off-target splicing effects (Hong et al., 2008; Jeong et al., 2008; Kwon et al., 2005; Song and Lee, 2008; Song et al., 2009). Thus, a trans-splicing ribozyme that can repair toxic mDMPK RNA with the wild-type one or replace the nucleus-entrapped mutant transcripts with RNA that can be released into the cytoplasm would be a potential tool for DM1 treatment. To this end, we have developed mDMPK 3-UTR-specific trans-splicing ribozymes by utilizing an RNA mapping procedure that identifies the most accessible ribozyme sites.  Any uridine (U) residue in a target RNA can be targeted for splicing by the trans-splicing ribozyme through alteration of the internal guide sequence (IGS), which is the 5-exon binding site of the ribozyme, to make it complementary to the target sequence (Long et al., 2003; Sullenger, 1995). However, the ribozyme can actually access only a limited number of uridines on the target RNA due to complicated tertiary structure formation of the substrate RNA (Lan et al., 2000). To develop most potential mDMPK 3-UTR-specific ribozymes, therefore, identification of the regions of the target transcript that are accessible to ribozymes should be performed first. To this end, we employed an RNA mapping strategy based on RNA tagging (Jones et al.,1996) and a trans- splicing ribozyme library, which has been described in detail elsewhere (Fig. 1) (Lan et al., 1998; Lan et al., 2000; Kwon et al., 2005; Ryu et al., 2003; Song and Lee, 2007).  We constructed the GN5 ribozyme library, which is based on the Tetrahymena group I intron and contains a randomized IGS. Ribozymes in the GN5 library can bind to the substrate RNA, cleave at any accessible U residue, and transfer a 3-exon that is tagged onto the ribozyme to the end of the cleaved 5-target product. We used a portion of the lacZ gene as a 3-exon molecular tag in the GN5 library. mDMPK 3-UTR RNA was synthesized using in vitro transcription of PCR-amplified vector encoding the mDMPK 3-UTR gene with 200 CTG repeats (kindly supplied by Dr. Leonidas Phylactou at the Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics). In order to map the mDMPK 3-UTR RNA, GN5 library RNA (10 nM) was incubated at 37C for 3 hrs under splicing conditions (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl) in the presence of guanosine (200 M) and in vitro-generated target RNA (100 nM). The trans-splicing reaction products were then reverse-transcribed at 37C for 30 min in the presence of argininamide (10 mM) with a 3primer that was specific for the ribozymes 3-exon lacZ sequence (5-ATGTGCTGCAAG GCGATT-3) (Jones et al. 1996). Produced cDNAs were amplified by PCR for 30 cycles using the same 3primer and a 5primer that was specific for the 5-end of the target RNA (5-ACCCTAGAACTGTCTTCGACTCC-3) or downstream region of the expanded CTG sequence (5-GGAATTCGGGGGATCACAGACCAT-3). The amplified trans- splicing products were then cloned into the pUC19 vector, and sequences of several clones were determined.’  When we analyzed sequences of the splicing junction sites of the trans-spliced products amplified with the 5-end of the target RNA as the 5 primer, several uridines, only in the upstream of the expanded trinucleotide repeat sequence, appeared to be particularly accessible (Fig. 2). Long hairpin structures of the expanded trinucleotide repeat might hamper PCR amplification of trans-spliced products that result from the splicing reaction with U residues downstream of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. To identify accessible U residues in the target RNA that were present downstream of the trinucleotide repeat, we also amplified trans-splicing products with the 5primer that was specific for right downstream part of the trinucleotide repeat sequence. Then, several uridines downstream of the expanded CUG repeat sequence were also shown to be particularly accessible. In conclusion, the most accessible site upstream of the CUG repeat sequence was located in the uridine at position 99 of the mDMPK 3-UTR RNA. In addition, the uridine at position 854 of the target RNA was the most accessible site that was present downstream of the CUG repeat. Interestingly, most of the accessible sites, including positions 99 and 854, which were identified using this mapping method, were generally present in the loop or bulge region of the RNAs secondary structure, as predicted by a computer program (Fig. 2). In contrast, no accessible sites were found in the long hairpin-formed CUG repeat region. In previous studies, we showed that the relative trans-splicing reaction efficacy at different sites in a target RNA in cells and in vitro was closely associated with the predicted accessibility determined by mapping results (Ryu et al., 2003; Ryu and Lee, 2004; Kwon et al., 2005). Therefore, the ribozymes that target the ac-), chronic hepatitis (CH), liver cirrhosis (LC), polymorphismIntroduction.
The infection of hepatitis virus B (HBV) is considered as an important health problem worldwide with an estimation of 350 million people chronically infected with the disease (Lavanchy, 2005). Although hepatic complications do not develop in most chronic hepatitis B carriers, 15% to 40% will develop liver cirrhosis (LC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which come with serious sequelae during their lifetime (Bosch et al., 2005).  Continuous consumption of more than 80g of ethanol everyday for a period longer than 10 years increases the risk of HCC by approximately fivefold; however, consumption of less than 80g of alcohol per day does not significantly increases the risk of HCC (Morgan et al., 2004). Although the development of alcohol related to HCC involves several factors including the presence of cirrhosis, oxidative stress, disturbed DNA methylation, and defective retinoic acid signaling, the precise mechanisms on how alcohol causes HCC at a molecular level are just beginning to emerge (Seitz & Stickel 2007; Stickel et al., 2002). According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, ethanol is classified as a human carcinogen because it induces HCC in animals and increases the risk for developing HCC in humans (Baan et al., 2007; Seitz and Stickel 2007).  Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1), a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily is important for the metabolic activation of many low-molecular-weight toxicants such as N-nitrosamines, aniline, vinyl chloride, urethane and alcohol (Guengerich et al., 1991). The participation of CYP2E1 in the ethanol metabolizing process is less important than alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). However, continuous ethanol consumption is known to increase the activity of CYP2E1 up to 20 fold, a major constituent of the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system in the liver (Stickel & Osterreicher 2006; Takahashi et al., 1993). Therefore, alcohol’s metabolizing capacity is increased in heavy drinkers. Moreover, CYP2E1 often catalyze the metabolic activation of various procarcinogens to eventual carcinogens (Guengerich et al., 1991; Koop, 1992).  Genetic variation appears to contribute to interindividual variation in CYP2E1 expression levels and activities (McCarver et al., 1998). Specifically, RsaI polymorphism (CYP2E1*5B) (rs2031920) has been associated with decreased CYP2E1 activity or inducibility (Hayashi et al., 1991; Lucas et al., 1995; Marchand et al., 1999; Watanabe et al., 1994). Functional CYP2E1 polymorphisms might therefore influence on susceptibility to cancer development. In one study, common genotypes were associated with risk of HCC (Yu et al., 1995). On the other hand, increased risk of HCC was observed with the rare genotype carriers in another study (Ladero et al., 1996). These studies suggest that variation of CYP2E1 can influence individuals risk of HCC.  Based on these studies, we have formed a hypothesis that polymorphisms of CYP2E1 can affect HCC progression among HBV-infected patients and therefore performed a screening of CYP2E1 to examine its genetic association with HBV clearance and HCC progression.Methods.
A total number of 1,092 Korean subjects having either present or past evidence of HBV infection were prospectively enrolled from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit or from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital from January 2001 to August 2003. All the study subjects were of Korean ethnicity. Subjects were classified into two different groups: CC (chronic carrier) and SR (spontaneously recovered), according to serological markers. The CC and SR cohorts consisted of 658 and 434 subjects, respectively, and the CC cohort was composed of 338 CH/LC and 320 HCC patients (Table 1). The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) over a six-month period, and for both anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively. We excluded subjects that were positive only for anti-HBs and not for anti-HBc, and those positive for anti-HCV or anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin-shi, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). Subjects whose average alcohol consumption assessed by interview was 510 g/day or average cigarette smoking was 1 pack/day were excluded. Patients who had any other types of liver diseases such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, biliary cirrhosis and Budd-Chiari syndrome were also excluded. No patients in our study had a previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment.  Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. All the patients in the CC group had been on regular medical follow-up and had been evaluated with serum alpha-fetoprotein level assessment, abdominal ultrasonography, and/or 2-phase spiral liver CT scan more than twice a year to detect early stages of HCC. We also performed abdominal MRI, bone scan, chest CT, brain MRI, brain CT, hepatic angiography or PET scan in some patients according to the clinical decisions. Liver cirrhosis was diagnosed pathologically or by the clinical evidences of portal hypertension such as visible collateral vessels on the abdominal wall, esophageal varices on esophagogastroscopy, palpable splenomegaly and sonographically definite findings of cirrhotic liver or ascites. HCC was diagnosed as described previously (the age of onset was determined by the date of the diagnosis.) (Bruix et al., 2001).We have sequenced exons, including exon-intron boundaries and their flanking regions, including the promoter region (1.5 kb) to discover polymorphisms in 24 Korean unregulated individual DNA samples using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Primer sets for the amplification and sequencing analysis of CYP2E1 were designed based on GenBank sequences (Ref. Genome seq.; NT_008818.16). Sequence variants were verified by chromatograms.For genotyping of polymorphic sites in our HBV study, amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (Livak, 1999). One allelic probe was labeled with the FAM dye and the other with the fluorescent VIC dye for TaqMan probes. Information regarding the primers is attached in Table 2. Primer Express (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) was used to design the MGB TaqMan probes. PCRs were run in a TaqMan Universal Master Mix without UNG (Applied Biosystems), with PCR primer concentrations of 900 nM and TaqMan MGB-probe concentrations of 200 nM. Reactions were performed in a 384-well format in a total reaction volume of 5 ml using 20 ng of genomic DNA. The plates were then placed in a thermal cycler (PE 9700, Applied Biosystems) and heated at 50C for 2 min and 95C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95C for 15 s and 60C for 1 min with a final soak at 25C. The TaqMan assay plates were transferred to the Prism 7900HT instrument (Applied Biosystems) where the fluorescence intensity in each well of the plate was read. Fluorescence data files from each plate were analyzed by automated allele-calling software (SDS 2.1).We searched for a spine of strong |D| and LD coefficient r between all pairs of biallelic loci (Hedrick & Kumar, 2001). Linkage disequilibrium (LD) was inferred using the algorithm developed by the Broad Institute(using the program Haploview) (Barrett et al., 2005). Haplotypes of each individual were inferred using the algorithm (PHASE, version 2.0) developed by Stephens et al. (Stephens et al., 2001). Subjects harboring missing genotypes were omitted in the analysis of individual single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes. The genotyping success rate was 99%, so it is unlikely that omitting a small number of individuals introduced any bias in the analysis. For analysis of viral clearance as an outcome, logistic regression models were used for calculating odds ratios (95% confidential interval) and corresponding p-values controlling for age (continuous value) and sex (male=0, female=1) as covariates. HBV genotypes, HBV DNA and Alanine transaminase (ALT) levels have been regarded as important factors influencing HBV clearance and the development of HCC. However, HBV genotype C is predominant among CCs of the virus in Korea (Bae et al., 2005; Odgerel et al., 2003; Song et al., 2005a; Song et al., 2005b; Yoo et al., 2003), and the HBV DNA and ALT levels were found to be fluctuating during the follow-up for the majority of our HBV cohort. Therefore, logistic models for HBV clearance were adjusted only for age and sex. Statistical power is calculated with PGA (Power for Genetic Association Analyses) matlab application (http://dceg.cancer.gov/bb/tools/pga) (Menashe et al., 2008). PGA is an application specifically designed to calculate statistical power and other values of case-control genetic association studies. For the present study, a co-dominant (1df) model with relative risk 1.3, disease prevalence value 7.1% (Lee et al., 1998), EDF (Effective Degree of Freedom) 2, and alpha error level 5% were used to calculate the statistical power of p-values for HBV clearance and HCC occurrence.Results.
In this study, we examined the association of CYP2E1 polymorphisms with persistent HBV infection and HCC occurrence. By direct sequencing of 24 individuals, we identified 19 sequence variants in the CYP2E1: 8 in the promoter, 3 in coding regions of exons (two non-synon-useful to future studies.IIntroduction.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, one of the most common virus infections among humans, is the major cause of acute and chronic liver diseases (Lin and Kao, 2008). It affects approximately 350 million people every year, especially those in Asia, Africa, Southern Europe, and Latin America (Lok and McMahon, 2007).  The clinical courses of HBV infection are diverse, ranging from spontaneous recovery after hepatitis to a chronic infection. The risk of developing liver cirrhosis (LC) or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is higher for those who happen to be HBV chronic carriers as compared to the uninfected ones (Merican, Guan et al. 2000). Several previous studies on HBV infection have reported that polymorphisms were associated with the risk of HCC and/or clearance of HBV (Kida et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2006; Park et al., 2006; Shin et al., 2003).  BIRC5 (baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis repeat-contaning 5), also known as survivin, is a protein encoded by the BIRC5 (Altieri 1994a; Altieri 1994b). It belongs to the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) gene family. The BIRC5 protein functions to inhibit caspase activation, thus leading to a decrease in apoptosis or programmed cell death. This has been shown by increase in apoptosis and decrease in tumor growth by disruption of BIRC5 induction pathways. In addition, the BIRC5 protein is highly expressed in most tumor cells (Sah et al., 2006). Because of this, BIRC5 is considered as one of the potent target for cancer therapy (Altieri, 2003).  A previous study demonstrates that BIRC5 is associated with microtubules of the mitotic spindle at the start of mitosis through the disruption of microtubule formation after BIRC5 protein in cancer cells are knocked out. This appearance leads to polyploidy as well as massive apoptosis (Castedo et al., 2004). Another study involves how the BIRC5 depleted cells exit mitosis without achieving proper chromosome alignment and then reforms single tetraploid nuclei. It suggests that BIRC5 protein is needed for sustaining mitotic arrest upon encounter with mitosis problems. The previous studies im-plicate that BIRC5 protein plays an important regulatory role both in the progression of mitosis and sustaining mitotic arrest (Castedo et al., 2004).  Based on those observations in cancer development, we hypothesized that BIRC5 polymorphisms may affect the function of BIRC5 protein and influence the clearance of HBV and HCC progression among HBV-infected patients thus, conducting a case-control study on the BIRC5 gene.Methods.
A total of 1,066 Korean subjects having either present or past evidences of HBV infection were enrolled from the outpatient clinic of the liver unit or from the Center for Health Promotion of Seoul National University Hospital. Subjects were divided into two different groups according to serologic markers: the chronic carrier (CC) group, and the spontaneous recovery (SR) group. The CC and SR cohorts consisted of 632 and 434 subjects, respectively (Table 1). The diagnoses of the CC and SR subjects were established by repeated seropositivity for the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (Enzygnost HBsAg 5.0; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) over a 6-month period, and for both anti-HBs (Enzygnost Anti-HBs II; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) and anti-HBc (AB-Corek; DiaSorin s.r.l., Saluggia, Italy) of the IgG type without HBsAg, respectively. Asymptomatic HBV carriers, which usually involve patients with inactive liver disease on liver biopsy, were also included the in CC group. However, it has been known that, HBV continues to replicate, albeit at very low levels, in some patients that have residual liver disease, which in most cases leads to the development of HCC. We excluded subjects who were positive for anti-HBs but not for anti-HBc, as well as those positive for anti-HCV or anti-HIV (GENEDIA; Greencross Life Science Corp., Yongin-shi, Korea, HCV3.2; Dong-A Pharmaceutical Co., Seoul, Korea). Patients who had any other types of liver diseases such as autoimmune hepatitis, toxic hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and Budd-Chiari syndrome were also excluded from the study. None of the patients had any previous history of immunosuppression or anti-viral treatment. Informed consent was obtained from each patient, and the Institutional Review Board of Human Research at Seoul National University Hospital approved the study protocol. The clinical parameters are summarized in Table 1.Using the ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), we sequenced exons, introns, and the promoter region (1.5) to discover variants from 24 unrelated individual’s DNA samples. Primer sets for the amplification and sequencing analysis of BIRC5 were designed based on GenBank sequences. Sequence analysis was carried out using SeqMan software.Amplifying primers and probes were designed for TaqMan (An et al., 2002) which was used for genotyping of the six polymorphic sites. Primer Express (Applied Biosystems) was used to design both the PCR primers and the MGB TaqMan probes. One allelic probe was labeled with FAM dye and the other with fluorescent VIC dye. Typically, PCR was run in the TaqMan Universal Master mix without UNG (Applied Biosystems) at primer concentration of 900 nM and TaqMan MGB-probe con-centration of 200 nM. The reaction was performed in a 384-well format with a total reaction volume of 5 ul using 20 ng of genomic DNA. The plate was then placed in a thermal cycler (PE 9,700, Applied Biosystems) and was heated for 2 min at 50C, then for 10 min at 95C, followed by 40 cycles of 95C for 15 sec, and finally 60C for 1 min. The TaqMan assay plate was then transferred to a Prism 7900HT instrument (Applied Biosystems) where the fluorescence intensity of each well was read. Fluorescence data files from each plate were analyzed by automated software (SDS 2.1). Detailed information concerning the primers can be obtained at the website mentioned above.We examined Lewontins D (|D|) and LD coefficient r between all pairs of biallelic loci (Hedrick, 1987). Haplotypes of each individual were determined using the algorithm developed by Stephens et al.(Stephens et al., 2001), which (PHASE) uses a Bayesian approach incorporating priori expectations of haplotypic structure from population genetic and coalescent theory. Genetic effects of inferred haplotypes were analyzed in the same way as SNPs. Logistic regression models were used for calculating odds ratios (95% confidential interval) and corresponding P-values controlling for age (continuous value) and sex (male=0, female=1) as covariates. In our analysis on HCC occurrence, LC (LC=1, no LC=0) and HBeAg (negative=0, blank=1, positive=2) were also used as covariates. Statistical powers were also calculated using PGA matlab application (Menashe, Rosenberg et al. 2008). PGA is designed to calculate statistical power and other values of case-control genetic association studies. In this study, a co-dominant (1df) model, relative risk 1.3, disease prevalence value 7.1% (Lee, Kim ORC1) and TOR complex 2 (TORC2) (Loewith et al., 2002). Especially, rapamycin-sensitive TORC1 pathway plays critical roles in cell growth. TORC1 affects ribosome biogenesis by regulating transcription of all three kinds of RNA polymerases (Mayer and Grummt, 2006). Inactivation of TORC1 results in several physiological characteristics of nutrient starvation, including induction of autophagy (Rohde et al., 2001). Recently, it has been highlighted that TOR signaling is deeply involved in eukaryotic cell aging and aging-related diseases. Inhibition of TOR signaling extends lifespan in yeast, nematode and fruitfly (Jia et al., 2004; Powers et al., 2006; Zid et al., 2009). Although the knowledge about TOR pathway has been greatly expanded by intensive research over the last two decades, there are still many unknown factors in the upstream and downstream of TOR signaling pathway due to its complexity and crosstalk with other signaling pathways.  According to the central dogma of molecular biology suggested about 50 years ago (Crick, 1958), most of the genetic information in DNA is finally transferred to proteins. Proteins, the final products in the central dogma, are not only fundamental components of living cells but also mediators of most of the cellular processes. Thus, to broaden our understanding of cellular functions and processes, it is essential to know the mechanisms how to regulate the activity or abundance of each protein. On these days, rapid developing technology in life science makes it possible to study proteins at a large-scale or proteomic level. Proteomics has become well established as a term for studying proteins at a large scale. Therefore, proteomic research might be very helpful in understanding the precise cellular functions and processes.  In the present study, to gain a novel insight into TOR signaling pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we sought to analyze proteomic expression changes in yeast cells treated with or without rapamycin. To determine proteomic expression changes in yeast, we took advantage of a collection of 4159 green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged yeast strains (Huh et al., 2003). Previously, several researches have used the yeast GFP-tagged collection for rapid and precise high-throughput measurement of protein abundances which could be represented by GFP intensities tagged on each protein (Lee et al., 2007; Newman et al., 2006; Song et al., 2009). From our proteomic analysis, we show that 83 proteins are decreased whereas 32 proteins are increased by rapamycin treatment. We suggest that these 115 proteins may be directly or indirectly involved in TOR signaling and can serve as candidates for further investigation of the effectors of TOR pathway. Further study with these candidates may reveal important insights into TOR signaling pathway.Methods.
4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains expressing GFP fusion proteins (Huh et al., 2003) were used to monitor changes in protein levels. A synthetic complete medium (SC; 0.67% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 2% glucose) were prepared as previously described (Sherman, 2002). Cells were grown to the mid-log phase in SC medium at 30C. Rapamycin (Tecoland) was dissolved in DMSO and used at 200 ng/ml concentration.GFP-tagged yeast strains were grown to the mid-log phase in 96 deep-well plates (Bioneer). The optical density (OD) and fluorescence intensity of the cells were measured in clear-bottom, 96-well plates (Greiner Bio- One) with a multilabel microplate reader (EnVision; PerkinElmer). The OD was measured using a 595-nm filter. Fluorescence intensity was measured using an excitation filter of 488 nm and an emission filter of 535 nm.To eliminate cellular autofluorescence, we set running median through OD with 3 parameters (window size: 0.01 OD; slide size: 0.002 OD; count threshold: 50). A relative abundance of each protein was calculated as:  Relative abundance of protein = fluorescence of protein - running medianwhere fluorescence of protein is a GFP intensity of each strain showing a certain OD and running median is an average GFP intensity of all strains showing the corresponding OD. To exclude an experimental variation causing plate tendency, standard deviations of non-tagged cells and 44 plates containing 4159 GFP-tagged cells between GFP intensity measurements at 0, 1 and 2 hr were calculated, and 14 plates showing higher standard deviations than those of half of non-tagged cells were excluded for further analysis. Among the remaining proteins, we selected 115 proteins showing higher relative abundance values than 1.65×(standard deviations of non-tagged cells).Results.
Physiological functions of a protein can be regulated at the level of abundance. Protein abundance changes result from a number of regulatory mechanisms ranging from transcription to post-translational modification. Thus, change in protein abundance can suggest a possibility of alteration in physiological roles of the protein. As a key regulatory signaling pathway of eukaryotic cell growth (Wullschleger et al., 2006), TOR pathway may be involved in the regulation of protein abundances. Based on this consideration, we hypothesized that protein abundance changes induced by rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of TORC1, might indicate involvement of the protein in TOR pathway. To test this hypothesis, we carried out a quantitative proteomic analysis with or without rapamycin treatment.  For a quantification of the yeast proteome, we took advantage of a collection of 4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains (Huh et al., 2003). Recently, several studies have shown that the yeast GFP-tagged collection can be used for profiling proteome expression by measuring the fluorescence intensity of each GFP-tagged strain (Lee et al., 2007; Newman et al., 2006; Song et al., 2009). To perform a proteomic quantification of the fluorescence intensities of the GFP-tagged yeast collection rapidly and precisely, we used a multilabel microplate reader that could simultaneously analyze the intensities of 96 GFP-tagged yeast cells. The validity of GFP-intensity data from a multilabel microplate reader was confirmed in our previous study (Song et al., 2009).   We measured the fluorescence of 4159 GFP-tagged yeast strains grown to the mid log-phase with or without treatment of 200 ng/ml rapamycin for 1 hr. During the data processing, we found that about 40% of raw data were not appropriate for further analysis and decided to exclude these data. The remaining 2422 GFP- intensity changes under rapamycin treatment were further analyzed. Consequently, we found that 83 proteins were significantly decreased by rapamycin treatment whereas 32 proteins were increased under the same condition (Fig. 1). These 115 proteins that underwent significant protein abundance changes under rapamycin treatment are listed in Table 1.In the previous study, DNA microarray was used to examine the genome-wide transcription alteration under rapamycin treatment (Hardwick et al., 1999). Since a change in protein level usually originates from an alteration in the gene expression, we tried to compare the protein abundance changes with the mRNA level changes under rapamycin treatment. Among the 115 proteins that showed significant protein abundance changes, 37 proteins also showed 2-fold changes in the mRNA level under rapamycin treatment. We investigated the correlation between the mRNA and protein level changes for these 37 proteins (Fig. 2). The Pearson correlation analysis of 37 proteins showed a positive correlation between the mRNA and protein expression except for 3 proteins, Rck2, Eno1 and Mak10. These 3 proteins showed a negative correlation, and exhibited an increase in protein abundance while their mRNA levels were decreased under rapamycin treatment.The 37 proteins showing significant changes in the protein and mRNA level under rapamycin treatment were classified into the Gene Ontology (GO) categories (Ashburner et al., 2000). As shown in Table 2, the 37 proteins were enriched especially in the GO categories related with protein synthesis. This enrichment resulted from inclusion of 16 ribosomal proteins. It has been shown that TOR signaling pathway controls translation initiation by regulating eIF2(Cherkasova and Hinne-the form of a web page can not be incorporated into other applications easily. Only a few services provide API access for batch mapping or incorporation into other applications.  The Protein Identifier Cross-Reference (PICR) service is a web application that provides interactive and programmatic (SOAP and REST) access to a mapping algorithm that uses the UniProt Archive (UniParc) as a data warehouse to offer protein cross-references. The Synergizer is a service for translating between sets of biological identifiers. It can, for example, translate Ensembl Gene IDs to Entrez Gene IDs, or IPI IDs to HGNC gene symbols, and much more. The Synergizer works via a web interface (for users who are not programmers) or through a web service (for programmatic access). BioMart is a query-oriented data management system, developed jointly by the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research (OICR) and the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI). It can be accessed via web services and can be adapted for identifier mapping.  BridgeDb, though not released publically yet, is another attempt at an id mapping framework for bioinformatics applications. BridgeDb lets one add the following capabilities quickly and easily: translate identifiers from one system to another, search references by id or symbol, and link out to online information for an identifier. Applications, such as the PathVisio pathway analysis tool, WikiPathways, CyThesaurus Cytoscape plug-in, and the NetworkMerge Cytoscape plug-in, are utilizing functionalities provided by BridgeDB.Methods.
Instead of developing the system from scratch, we assembled the application by re-using available services, frameworks, and libraries as much as possible.  For ID mapping itself, we used ID mapping services provided by other research groups that allowes programmatic access. We picked the service provided by PICR, Synergizer, and Biomart, as they are recently developed and/or well maintained. Currently, the BridgeDb library implements an ID mapping service for them, and we used BridgeDbs API for the access of id mapping services. Three mapping services were incorporated into one application, and relevant metadata and mapping results are fetched from each service provider on the fly; no data are stored in the application.We developed the application as a NetBeans Platform- based standalone Java Web Start rich client application.  We selected the Java environment because the developed application can be utilized under most operating systems, such as Windows, Linux, and Mac OS, provided that the Java Runtime Environment is installed. Java Web Start technology enables the standalone Java software applications to be deployed with a single click over the network. Java Web Start ensures that the most current version of the application, as well as the correct version of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE), will be deployed.   Most desktop applications have similar features, such as menus, toolbars, status bars, progress visualization, data displays, customization settings, the saving and loading of user-specific data and configurations, splash screens, About boxes, internationalization, help systems, and so on. For these and other typical client application features, a rich client platform, which is an application lifecycle environment and a basis for desktop applications, provides a framework with which the features can quickly and simply be put together. A rich client platform also frees the developer from being concerned with tasks that have little to do with the applications business logic. Currently, the NetBeans Platform and Eclipse rich client platform are in wide use for Java- based application development. Recently, some bioinformatics-related applications, such as BioClipse, Quantitative Biology Tool, SpectraSuite, InstantJChem, and ChipInspector, have been developed using the rich client platform. It is expected that utilization of the rich client platform for applications development will become popular.  We chose the NetBeans platform because there already exist many Swing-based bioinformatics applications. We plan to develop a general purpose bioinformatics application framework, covering various areas by adapting and integrating these existing applications as needed.  We designed the application functionality and layout, developed the core mapping function, and glued those to the NetBeans platform. The NetBeans platform provides quite a lot of libraries for applications development (Fig. 1), and we tried to utilize the functionalities as much as possible and minimize custom developments. After the initial steep learning curve, we were able to develop a high-quality, robust, and extensible application without much housekeeping code development effort.  By using the Swingx JXTable, the resulting mapping table can be customized further by column visibility control, row sorting, and column ordering. The copy/ paste/save supports are provided for the resulting mapping table with user-defined column and row selection (Fig. 2).Results and Discussion.
The developed application is simple and easy yet powerful for ID conversion. It supports three widely used mapping services and can convert many ids from one source database into many target databases at once. By copying the resulting mapped ids and mapping again against other cross-referencing providers, it is possible to map the ids further.  We plan to extend the source database to the other id mapping services that provide programmatic access, such as CRONOS (Waegele et al., 2009). In that respect, we will use JAX-WS directly instead of the BridgeDb library, which currently supports only a limited number of mapping services.  The application is now a standalone Web Start application, but it can be converted into a NetBeans platform plug-in with simple re-packaging. The converted plug-in can be used as an ID mapping provider for other bioinformatics applications.  There are many bioinformatics Java GUI applications, but combining each application with another is next to impossible for most cases, because each application implements its own way of plumbing.Programs that are developed as plug-ins for a rich client platform can be re-used and work together seamlessly with other independently developed plug-ins. This application can be used as an ID mapping provider plug-in for other bioinformatics applications. Applications development in this direction will facilitate the merging and integration of individual modules into a large bioinformatics applications framework that includes many areas.