A Comparative Genome-Wide Analysis of G ATA Transcription.

Factors in Fungi

GATA    transcription    factors    are    widespread    eukaryotic

regulators whose DNA-binding domain is a class IV zinc finger motif in the form CX2CX17 20CX2C followed by a basic region.

In fungi, they act as transcriptional activators or repressors    in    several    different    processes,    ranging    from nitrogen source utilization to mating-type switching.

Using an in-house bioinformatics portal system, we surveyed 50 fungal    and    9    out-group    genomes    and    identified    396 putative fungal GATA transcription factors.

The proportion of GATA transcription factors within a genome varied among taxonomic lineages.

Subsequent analyses of phylogenetic relationships among the fungal GATA transcription factors, as well as a study of their domain architecture and gene structure, demonstrated high degrees of conservation in type IVa and type IVb zinc finger motifs and the existence of distinctive clusters at least at the level of subphylum.

The SFH1 subgroup with a 20-residue loop was newly identified, in addition to six well-defined subgroups in the subphylum Pezizomycotina.

Furthermore, a novel GATA motif with a 21-residue loop (CX2CX21CX2C, designated ‘zinc finger type IVc’) was discovered within the phylum Basidiomycota.

Our results suggest that fungal GATA factors might have undergone multiple distinct modes of evolution resulting in diversified cellular modulation in fungi.

GATA transcription factors (TFs) are a family of regulatory proteins widespread in eukaryotes.

They contain one or two highly conserved type IV zinc finger motifs (CX2CX17 20CX2C) followed by a basic region that recognize and bind to a consensus DNA sequence, WGATAR (W=T or A; R=G or A), of target genes (Scazzocchio, 2000).

Based on the spacing between the cysteine pairs at the zinc    finger    loop,    the    zinc    finger    motifs    have    been categorized into two groups: those with 17-residue loops (CX2CX17CX2C    zinc    finger    type    IVa)    and    those    with 18-residue    loops    (CX2CX18CX2C    zinc    finger    type    IVb Teakle and Gilmartin, 1998).

The DNA-binding domains of characterized metazoan GATA TFs always have type IVa zinc fingers with a leucine in the seventh position of the loop.

In vertebrates, six distinct GATA TFs are well-defined and they play critical roles in development, differentiation, and control of cell proliferation (for review, see Lowry and Atchley, 2000).

In contrast, all the characterized GATA factors in plants contain type IVb zinc finger motifs with either leucine or glutamine in the seventh position of the loop and an additional residue lysine in position 16.

Plant GATA TFs have been implicated in light-dependent and nitrate-dependent control of transcription, although their in vivo functions remain very poorly understood (for review, see Reyes et al., 2004).

In fungi, all GATA TFs contain a highly conserved zinc finger DNA-binding domain and the majority of the fungal GATA TFs fall into two different categories: one is ‘animal-like’ and the second is ‘plant-like.’ The residue at position seven of plant-like fungal GATA factors is glutamic acid.

Fungal GATA TFs are involved in diverse functions such as nitrogen control, siderophore biosynthesis, light-regulated photomorphogenesis, circadian regulation, and mating-type switching (Scazzocchio, 2000).

Recently, 20- and 19-residue zinc finger loops were found in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Maxon and Herskowitz, 2001) and Candida albicans (Munchow et al., 2002), respectively.

Fungal and plant GATA TFs typically contain a single zinc finger, and animal GATA TFs typically have two or more zinc    fingers,    although    exceptions    occur    (Teakle    and Gilmartin, 1998; Scazzocchio, 2000; Reyes eta!., 2004).

Since the completion of the S. cerevisiae genome sequencing project in 1996, over 50 other fungal genome sequences including Neurospora crassa (Borkovich et al., 2004), Magnaporthegrisea (Dean etal., 2005), Aspergillus

nidulans (Galagan et al., 2005), and Ustilago maydis (Kamper et al., 2006) have been completed at a phenomenal rate,    and    another    20    projects    are    underway.

These projects have generated considerable numbers of hypothetical proteins      with      as-yet-undefined      biological      functions, indicating    that    accurate    automated    annotation techniques and    functional    prediction    are    critical    to    fungal    genome annotation and function analysis.

In this study, we constructed a pipeline that catalogs and annotates predicted functions of hypothetical proteins through an in-house bioinformatics portal system (CROSSFPP; Park    et    al.,    unpublished).

The    CROSSFPP    system provides a common gateway to access genome databases and    bioinformatics    tools    like    InterPro,    ClustalW,    and BLAST.

Using    our    pipeline    system,    we    conducted    a genome-wide; survey of GATA TF-related sequences in 50 fungal species and 9 out-group species, and identified 396 putative fungal GATA TFs.

Subsequent analyses of evolutionary    relationships    among    the    fungal    GATA    TFs demonstrated that type IVa and type IVb zinc finger motifs are highly conserved, and GATA TFs in the subphylum Pezizomycotina can be classified into seven distinctive phylogenetic subgroups, including a newly identified SFH1 subgroup with a 20-residue loop.

In addition, a novel GATA motif wi th a 21-residue loop (CX2CX21CX2C, designated ‘zinc finger type IVc’) was discovered within the phylum Basidiomycota.

Our results suggest that fungal GATA TFs underwent multiple distinct modes of evolution such as selective loss or duplication, or sequence divergence.

Furthermore, we provide a new strategy to predict the putative roles of GATA TFs by comparative genomics analysis.

Genome sequences of 50 fungi and 9 out-groups were used for analysis of fungal GATA TFs and their phylogenetic relationships.

Species and database origins of the 59 genome sequences are listed in Table 1.

For efficient analyses, the diversely formatted 59 genome datasets were standardized to the same format and integrated into a dedicated database (MySQL database) in which each protein sequence of an annotated gene was treated as an object in a single pipeline (Fig.

1).

The standardization process was applied to chromosome (or contig) sequences and nucleotide sequences of annotated genes.

Putative GATA TFs were identified using InterProScan (Zdobnov and Apweiler, 2001) installed in the CROSSFPP

system (Fig.

1; Park etal., unpublished).

In total, 740,984 annotated protein sequences retrieved from 59 genome databases (470,617 from 50 fungal genomes) were

scanned    for    domains    denoted    "GATA-type    zinc    finger" with accession number IPR000679.

The results were stored in the InterPro annotation    database in the CROSSFPP system for further analysis and all data collected in this study are available at http://ftfd.snu.ac.kr/ GATA/.

Selected proteins were verified as true GATA TFs by several criteria, for example, the length of GATA motifs (>40 amino acids), the three-dimensional structure of zinc fingers using SWISS-MODEL (Schwede etal., 2003), and the    existence    of    similar    motifs    like    the    Arf    GTPase activating domain (Vitale etal., 1998).

Amino acid sequences of GATA TFs were aligned using ClustalW 1.83 (Thompson et al., 1994) and MEGA3 (Kumar et al.

, 2004).

Phylogenetic trees were constructed by the neighbor-joining method (Saitou and Nei, 1987) and viewed in TreeViewX ( http://darwin.zoology.gla .

ac.uk/~rpage/ treeviewx/index.html).A!l    sequence    alignments    were    tested with a bootstrap method using 10,000 repetitions.

BLAST    searches    (McGinnis    and    Madden,    2004)    were carried out to find genes/proteins with sequence similarity


to the identified GATA TFs.

Fifty-nine individual species datasets and one combined dataset were created and used in various BLAST searches.

The e-value threshold was set at 1 e-10 due to the innate similarity of GATA motifs around 1e-7.

Interspecies    comparison    of    identified    GATA    TFs    was performed at the domain architecture and gene structure levels.

Domain architecture information on     predicted GATA TFs was obtained from InterProScan.

Annotated DNA-binding     domains     and     other     functional     domains were graphically displayed over full-length proteins.

Gene structures of the GATA TFs were also graphically visualized using exon and intron information provided from genome databases.

Fifty-nine publicly available genome sequences, including 50 fungal species, were incorporated into a dedicated database in a standardized format to manipulate different forms of data with the same pipeline.

Genes with IPR000679 denoted as "GATA-type zinc finger" were retrieved and their putative structures were analyzed via SWISS-MODEL (Fig.

1).

Through this process, 396 genes from 50 fungal species, 159 genes from 3 plant and 4 animal species, and 1 gene from two oomycetes were identified as GATATFs (Table 1).

The number of fungal GATATFs in each species ranged from 3 to 16, which is relatively fewer than in plant and metazoan species.

The average number of GATA TFs in seven species belonging to the phylum    Basidiomycota    was    about    9.9,    and    that    of Rhizopus oryzae (the phylum Zygomycota) was 37, the largest number of GATA TFs in a single fungus species.

Species belonging to the phylum Ascomycota contained about 6.9 GATA TFs on average.

The average number of GATA TFs among the three subphyla within the phylum Ascomycota was similar; i.e., the subphyla Taphrinomycotina, Saccaromycotina,     and     Pezizomycotina     contained     on average 4 (1 species), 7.7 (22 species), and 6.2 (19 species) GATATFs, respectively.

However, the proportion of GATA TFs within the genome in each species differed between the subphyla Saccharomycotina and Pezizomycotina (Fig.

2).

GATA TFs in Saccharomycotina represented 0.12% of the genome content on average, ranging from 0.08 to 0.21 %.

The percentage in Pezizomycotina ranged from 0.04 to 0.08%, with an average of 0.05%, which is one-third of

that in Saccharomycotina.

This result shows that GATATFs in Pezizomycotina might have increased their complexity rather than number in order to modulate more diversified cellular processes.

A phylogenetic tree of all 556 GATA factors identified in

this study was constructed in an attempt to reveal the relationships among putative GATATFs, in particularthe phylogenetic position of fungal GATA TFs relative to those of animals and plants.

In agreement with previous studies (Teakle and Gilmartin, 1998 Scazzocchio, 2000), the phylogenetic positions of fungal GATA TFs were different from those of animal and plant GATA TFs.

Most fell into independent clusters.

When their domain arrangement was examined, animal GATA TFs from four species contained additional domains for DNA binding, like the C2H2 zinc finger and Myb DNA-binding domain, but not

additional domains for different functions.

However, plant GATA TFs from three species included additional domains for different functions, like a CCT domain involved in light signal transduction (Hayama and Coupland, 2003),    but none for DNA binding.

Similar to plant GATA TFs, fungal

GATA TFs also contained extra domains with various functions, such as PAS, which acts as a sensor in many signaling proteins (Hefti eta/., 2004), and were devoid of other DNA-binding domains.

Interestingly, only one GATA TF    was    identified    in    Phytophthora    sojae    and    none    in Phytophthora infestans (Table 1).

A further analysis indicated that these two oomycetes also lacked fungal- specific transcription factors like APSES proteins (data not shown; Sheppard et al., 2005), supporting the idea that the oomycetous Phytophthora species, which were once classified as fungi, are the most distantly related organisms from true fungi (James et al., 2006).

Within    the    kingdom    Fungi,    GATA    TFs    exhibited different properties in different phyla.

In the phylum Zygomycota, which is thought to be basal to Ascomycota and Basidiomycota (Cavailer-Srrith, 1987), R oryzae appeared to possess the largest number of GATA TFs among fungi (Table 1) and showed a different evolutionary preference from others.

Since only one Zygomycota has been sequenced to date, most GATA TFs failed to be grouped with any other fungal GATA TFs; only 12 of 37 were grouped in three clusters.

Further analyses of their domain architecture and gene structures suggest that R. oryzae     might     have     undergone     several     duplication events at a relatively early stage.

In    the    phylum    Basidiomycota,    69    GATA    TFs    were identified    from    seven    genome    sequences    (Table    1), among which    only Urbsl of U. maydis and Cwc2 of Cryptococcus     neoformans have been characterized (Voisard et al., 1993, Lu et al., 2005).

Those GATA TFs formed seven clusters: two including GATA TFs from other phyla and with a known function, and five including GATA TFs only within this phylum and without any previously defined GATA TFs.

Consistent with its function in the regulation     of     ferrichrome-type     siderophore     biosynthesis (Voisard et al., 1993), U. maydis Urbsl was loosely clustered with other fungal siderophore-regulating TFs (the SRP group in Fig.

3).

C. neoformans Cwc2, homologous to N. crassa \NC-2 (Lu et al., 2005; discussed below), assembled with other WC-2-like GATA TFs (the WC2 group in Fig.

3).

The GATA TFs of 42 species belonging to the phylum Ascomycota were assembled into distinctive phylogenetic clusters, which were well supported by high bootstrap values at the level of subphylum.

While most dusters induded GATA TFs from both subphyla Pezizomycotina (filamentous ascomycetes) and Saccharomycotina (yeast formasoomyoetes), several GATA TFs were observed only in a specific subphylum.

In Pezizomycotina, a new group of GATA transcription factor, SFH1, was identified in addition to six subgroups of well-defined GATA TFs all seven subgroups are extensively discussed below.

In Saccharomycotina,

two subgroups comprising    SRD1 and ECM23, and GAT3-and GAT4-like GATA    TFs were found only in Saccharomyces species, while a subgroup of GATA TFs (tentatively named Y1), including orf 19.1150 of C. albicans and CTRG03475.3 of C. tropicalis, appeared to be present only in Candida species.

As described below in detail, the biological functions of Srdlp, Ecm23p, Gat3p, and Gat4p have been defined in S. cerevisiae, but those of the Y1 Candfda-spedfic GATA TFs have not been characterized to date.

Schizosaccharomyces pombe of the subphylum Taphrinomycotina contained only four GATA TFs.

They barely clustered with other fungal GATA TFs, suggesting their distant phylogenetic relationship within the fungi.

The GATA TFs of 19 species in the subphylum Pezizomycotina (filamentous ascomycetes) encompassing     four     classes were analyzed further.

These included    two    species (Botrytis    cinerea    and    Sclerotinia    sclerotiorum)    belonging to the class Leotiomycetes; five species of Aspergillus, Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum, and Uncinocarpus reesii belonging to the class Eurotiomycetes; three    species    of    Fusarium,    Chaetomium    globosum,    M. grisea, N. crassa, Podospora anserina, and Trichoderma reesei belonging to the class Sordariomycetes; and Stagnospora nodorum belonging to the class Dothideomycetes (Table 1).

Two representative species (S. cerevisiae and

C. albicans) in the subphylum Saccharomycotina (yeast form ascomycetes) were also included for comparison (Fig.

3).

A total of 117 GATA TFs was retrieved from 19 species, with an average of 6 GATA TFs per species, ranging from 3 to 9.

The distribution of GATA TFs in Sordariomycetes     and     Eurotiomycetes     was     different, where an average of 7 (ranging from 4 to 9) and 5 (ranging from 3 to 6) GATA TFs were identified, respectively.

Seven phylogenetic subgroups were identified from a phylogenetic tree with full-length sequences and named SRP, NIT2, ASD4, WC1, WC2, NSDD, and SFH1.

A similar tree structure was obtained when the domain sequences were used.

Most GATA TFs in Pezizomycotina were distributed    evenly    to    the    first    six    subgroups,    enabling prediction of their functions in other species.

Two clades were    found    within    each    subgroup,    reflecting    already constructed taxonomic structures at the class level.

These data suggest that these clades of GATA TFs emerged before    divergence    into    classes,    and    then    evolved    in different ways.

TheSFHI subgroup with 11 GATA TFs was newly    identified    in    this    comprehensive    analysis    and named after Sfhlp, a new Snf5p paralog (Cao etal., 1997).

GATA TFs in this subgroup contained a SNF5/SMARCB1/ IN 14 domain constituting the Swi/Snf family of chromatin­ remodeling    complex    in    S.    cerevisiae    (Klochendler-Yeivin and Yaniv, 2001).

The biological functions of SFH1 GATA factors    in    filamentous    ascomycetes    have    not    yet    been characterized.

The GATA    TFs    in    each    subgroup    were    highly conserved not only in amino acid sequence but also in domain arrangement and gene structure (Fig.

4).

Most subgroups had one zinc finger motif, except the SRP subgroup    with    two    type    IVa    zinc    finger    motifs.

The location of the zinc finger motif was conserved within each subgroup.

Zinc finger motifs were mostly located near the C-terminus, with those of SRP slightly biased to the N-terminal and those of ASD4 varying among species.

Four subgroups had an additional domain other than a GATA-type zinc finger, a proline-rich region in NsdD, three PAS domains in WC-1, one PAS domain in WC-2, and SNF5/SMARCB1/INI1 in Sfhlp.

The ASD4 group had a leucine zipper, implicated in protein-protein interactions not yet compiled into the InterPro database.

In contrast, additional domains were rarely identified in GATA TFs from Saccharomycotina.

Additional domains with functions other than DNA binding were also identified in plant GATA TFs (Reyes et al., 2004).

These data    seem    to    support    modular    evolution    of    different groups of GATA TFs that is, GATA zinc finger domains might be integrated in different templates with other domains (Riechmann et al., 2000).

GATA TFs in the same subgroup also shared similar gene structure,

which was clearly demonstrated in the SRP subgroup.

Three exons and two introns comprised this subgroup of GATA TFs in each species, in which two zinc finger motifs spanning two adjacent exons interfered with each intron.

Seventeen GATA TFs were grouped with the SRE of N. crassa,    suggesting    a    role    in    siderophore    biosynthesis and regulation, while C. globosum did not have this subgroup of GATA TFs.

SreA acts as a repressor of siderophore    biosynthesis    (Eisendle    et    al.,    2003)    and SRE is known to act as a negative regulator of iron transport.

SidA     (L-orhithine-N 5 -oxygenase)     and     SidC (peptide synthetase), the other two enzymes implicated in siderophore biosynthesis in A. nidulans (Haas, 2003), were    also    well    distributed    among    the    fungal    species (data not shown).

Four GATA TFs are known to regulate nitrogen metabolism in S. cerevisiae, two of which act positively (Gln3p and Gat1 p), and the other two negatively (Dal80p and Deh1 p; Cunningham etal., 2000; Oliveira eta!., 2003).

Homologs of these two subgroups were identified and extensively characterized in N. crassa and A. nidulans.

NIT2 and AREA, homologs of Gln3p, functioned as major nitrogen regulatory    proteins    in    N.    crassa    and    A.    nidulans, respectively (Tao and Marzluf, 1999; Morozov etal., 2001).

NIT2-Iike GATA factors were present in 18 species, except H.capsulatum.

NIT2 is known to interact with the Zn(ll)Cys6 binudear transcription factor NIT4 (NCU08294.2) to regulate expression otnit-3, encoding nitrate reductase (Feng and Marzluf, 1998; Mo and Marzluf, 2003).

NIT4 homologs were also identified in 19 fungal species, indicating that the regulatory    machinery    of    nitrogen    metabolism    may    be conserved in Pezizomycotina (data not shown).

The    involvement    of    Dal80p    homologs    in    nitrogen metabolism is     controversial.

NREB of Penicillium chrysogenumwas    reported to be involved in nitrogen metabolism, as was NRE, a Gln3p homolog (Haas etal., 1997).

AREB also partially complemented the areA phenotype in A. nidulans (Conlon et al., 2001), but ASD4 in N. crassa was not implicated in this cellular process (Feng et al., 2000).

However, ASD4-like GATA factors were     conserved     among     the     Pezizomycotina.

Only Aspergillus terreus did not have this subgroup of GATA TFs.

All ASD4 orthologs, except that in H. capsulatum, were predicted to contain the conserved leucine zipper motif, which may be involved in protein-protein interactions, leaving the possibility of homo- or heterodimer formation for functioning.

Homo- or heterodimerization of Dal80p and Deh1 p of S. cerevisiae has been reported by

two-hybrid    analysis    (Svetlov    and    Cooper,    1998).

The GATA and leucine zipper motifs consisted of 53 and 21 amino acids (aa), respectively, and were arranged in a conserved    manner    with    similar    spacing    (109-126    aa) among species, irrespective of their location (Fig.

5A).

The amino acid sequences of zinc finger and leucine zipper regions were also highly conserved among species (Fig.

5B and 5C).

Fifteen and 16 GATA TFs were grouped together with WHITE COLLAR-1 (WC-1) and WC-2 of N. crassa, respectively.

C. globosum contained a WC-1 orthoJog and a WC-2-like protein missing the GATA motif.

C. immitis and U. reesii possessed neither WC-1 nor WC-2 orthologs, while P. anserina appeared to lack WC-2.

WC-1 and WC-2 are    essential    components    for    light    responses,    including entrainment of the circadian clock in N. crassa, which are mediated by the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains (Linden et

al., 1997; Lee et al., 2000).

WC-1 contains three PAS domains and WC-2 has one.

The number and structure of domains    were    conserved    among    the    WC-1    and    WC-2 orthologs    identified,    except    those    in    Aspergillus    oryzae (Fig.

4).

The most extreme N-terminal PAS domain of WC-1 belongs to a specialized class known as LOV (light, oxygen,    or    voltage)    domains    and    acts    as    blue-light photoreceptor (reviewed in Cheng eta/., 2003; Crosson eta!., 2003).

Eleven flavin-contacting residues found in the LOV domain of phototropins, the plant blue-light photoreceptors for phototrophism, were also well conserved among WC-1 homologs from 14 species.

Recently, MgWC-1 was also reported to act as blue-light receptor in M. grisea, regulating asexual spore development and release (Lee et al., 2006).

The existence    of a    circadian    clock    in Aspergillus was reported, along with the homologs LreAand LreB (Greene et al., 2003).

Overall sequence similarity was higher among members within the same class, i.e., Eurotiomycetes in which Aspergillus resides and Sordariomycetes in which Neurospora and Magnaporthe reside (data not shown).

In addition, FRQ orthologs serving as circadian oscillators in N. crassa (Loros et al., 1986 Lee et al., 2000) were only found in nine Sordariomycetes species.

These results suggest that fungal species within Sordariomycetes may be subject to a similar light regulation as that in N. crassa, while    supporting    previous    reports    that    the    Aspergillus circadian    clock    has    different    properties    than    the    well described N. crassa clock (Greene eta!., 2003).

Fifteen GATA TFs from 14 species were grouped with NsdD of A. nidulans, which is involved in activating sexual development (Han et al., 2001).

NsdD homologs were not identified     in     five     species:     C.     globosum,     Fusarium graminearum,    Fusarium    solani,    S.    sclerotiorum,    and    U. reesii.

The NsdD of A. nidulans consisted of 461 amino acids with one type IVb GATA zinc finger domain near the C-terminus, and was rich in proline (11.3%) and serine (13.4%).

GATA TFs in this subgroup shared a similar primary structure, except those in B. cinema (BC1 G_10441.1) and M. grisea (MGG_07319.5).

These two GATA factors consisted of about 130 amino acids, suggesting the possibility of an incorrect gene model.

However, the GATA TFs retrieved from the same class were more closely related, in spite of the length variation.

This subgroup of GATA TFs was distantly related to GAT2 (YMR136W) of S. cerevisiae, whose function remains unknown.

Several GATA TFs comprised a new highly conserved cluster.

Eleven members belong to this subgroup.

All of them have an evolutionarily highly conserved SNF5/SMARCB1/ INI1 domain (IPR006939), a component of the yeast

SWI/SNF    complex    (Klochendler-Yeivin    and    Yaniv, 2001).

Because the SNF5 domain contained most of the amino acids of these GATA TFs, we searched for proteins with IPR006939 in the fungal genomes.

Of 37 genes with an SNF5 domain from filamentous ascomycetes, 11 had a GATA type zinc finger motif near the C-terminus after subsequent    domain    analysis,    and    these    resided    in    the same clade with SFH1 of S. cerevisiae, one of two yeast homologs    of    human    SNF5/INI1.

SFH1    consists    of    the chromatin remodeling RSC complex, which is known to interact     with     kinetochore     components     involved     in chromosome segregation during the G2-M transition and to play a role in reconfiguring cetromeric and flanking nucleosomes (Cao et al., 1997).

Interestingly, a GATA motif along with the adjacent highly basic region was not found in SFH1 homologs from Eurotiomycetes or in SFH1 itself.

These results again support the modular evolution of GATA domains during evolution, conferring functions in addition to chromatin remodeling.

The spacing between two cysteine pairs at zinc finger loops in all members was 20 amino acid residues, forming a different type of zinc finger motif (type IVc).

A total of 173 putative GATA TFs were identified from 23 yeast genome sequences, including nine Saccharomyces and six Candida genomes (Table 1).

Each species of Saccharomyces possesses ten GATA TFs (Table 1) and most have been well defined in S cerevisiae.

Saccharomyces kluyveri and two S. cerevisiae strains, RM11a and YJM789, contained only two and seven annotated GATA TFs in their genomes, respectively (Table 1).

However, this outcome was likely due to the limitation of automated gene prediction    algorithms    rather    than    to    strain    divergence.

When explored using BLAST searches, for example, the genomes of the two S. cerevisiae variants contained unannotated GATA TFs whose protein sequences were almost identical to the counterparts in the S. cerevisiae 288C genome.

Our      phylogenetic      analysis      indicated      that      70 Saccharomyces GATA TFs were categorized into six subgroups: NIT2 (Gln3p and Gatlp of S. cerevisiae), ASD4 (Gzf3p and Dal80p of S. cerevisiae), NSDD (Gat2p of S. cerevisiae), ASH1 (Ashlpof S. cerevisiae), SRD1/ECM23 (Srdlp and Ecm23p of S. cerevisiae), and GAT3/GAT4 (Gat3p and Gat4p of S. cerevisiae).

While the first three subgroups    and    the    ASH1    subgroup    were    shared    by filamentous fungal and Candida species, respectively, the SRD1/ECM23 and GAT3/GAT4 subgroups were found only in Saccharomycesspecies.

Although their precise biological functions remain undefined, Srdlp of S. cerevisiaeis

related to pre-rRNA processing (Fabian etal., 1990), and Ecm23p, previously known as Srd2p, is associated with pseudohyphal growth (Canizares et al., 2002).

Gat3p of S. cerevisiae in the GAT3 subgroup is responsible for the selective use of good over poor nitrogen sources (Banerjee and Zhang, 2003), and the role of Gat4p needs to be characterized.

Interestingly, the SRP-type GATA TF, well conserved throughout the fungi, was lacking in this genus and the closely related Kluyveromyces.

Candida    albicans    has    a    relatively    large    number    of GATA TFs compared to other Candida species (Table 1).

Forty-nine GATA TFs from six Candia species were grouped into six subgroups: the Candida-specific Y1, SRP, NIT2, ASD4, NSDD, and ASH1 groups.

Although ASH1 GATA TFs are conserved in Saccharomyces and Candida    species,    they    have evolved different functions.

Even with the sequence similarity, Ash1 p of S. cerevisiae represses HO expression in the daughter cell responsible for mating-type switching (Cosma, 2004), but CaASHI of C. albicans controls filamentous growth and virulence (Inglis    and    Johnson,    2002).

The    Y1    Candida-specific GATA TFs have not been characterized.

In addition, except those of S. pombe, which belongs to Taphrinomycotina, GATA TFs from other saprophytic yeasts have a tendency to assemble with Saccharomyces GATA TFs.

In S. pombe, four GATA TFs were identified, among which only Fep1, which encodes an iron-sensing transcription factor (Pelletier et al., 2003), was distantly related to SFU1, the SRP of C. albicans (Lanet al., 2004).

GATA motifs are typically classified into two groups based on the spacing between two cysteine pairs at the zinc finger loop: type IVa ^CXvCXzC) and type IVb (CX2CX18CX2C).

Fungal species contain both types of zinc finger loops, while animals have    only type IVa and plants have exclusively type IVb    (Teakle and Gilmartin, 1998).

To decipher the distribution and relationship of GATA motifs in fungi, 442 motifs from 396 GATA TFs were retrieved from 50 fungal genomes.

In addition, 184 motifs from 159 GATA TFs were also retrieved from four animal and three plant genomes for comparative analysis.

Forty-six fungal GATA TFs, including siderophore regulatory proteins in A. nidulans (SREA) and N. crassa (SRE), had two motifs.

Of the fungal GATA TFs, 233 (52.7%) were type IVa and 139 (31.4%) were type IVb.

When    type    IVa    GATA    motifs    were    phylogenetically analyzed, three clear clades were identified: one each specific to fungi or animals, and one for both fungal and animal GATA TFs (Fig.

6A).

NIT2, ASD4, and SRP C-terminal GATA motifs were grouped in the fungal-

specific    clade.

However,    SRP    N-terminal    GATA    motifs were grouped in the fungal and animal clade.

It is interesting to note that each GATA motif at different positions in the SRP subgroup was placed in a different

clade, suggesting that they might have evolved separately after a duplication event (Caddick and Arst, 1990).

GATA motifs of proteins belonging to the WC1, WC2, and NSDD subgroups were identified as type IVb and grouped separately from plant type IVb (Fig.

6B).

NPJ587966.1 of S. pombe had the type IVb motif, but was not grouped in the fungal clade.

It remains to be determined whether the type IVb motif in Taphrinomycotina is independently placed and/or is the bridge between fungal and plant clades.

In addition to type IVa and IVb, several GATA TFs with 19- or    20-residue motifs have been found in plants (Reyes    et al., 2004) and fungi belonging to the subphylum    Saccharomycotina    (Munchow    et    al.,    2002).

ASH1 in S. cerevisiae has a 20-residue motif and its DNA-binding ability was    shown by a DNA footprinting experiment (Maxon and    Herskowitz, 2001).

CaASHI in C. albicans has a 19-residue motif that also binds DNA (Munchow et al., 2002).

Fifty-six GATA motifs from 50 fungal genomes were found to have 19- or 20-residues.

In addition, six motifs having 21-residues were also identified in fungal GATA TFs, but not in plants and animals.

Based on our findings, the 19- to 21 -residue type GATA motif, CX2-4CX19 21CX2C, was collectively named type IVc.

Type IVc motifs were also found in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans, but not in humans or mice (Table 1).

In fungi, type IVc motifs were found in GATA TFs from the phyla Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota.

However, the frequency varied among fungal taxonomic groups.

Basidiomycetes showed the highest proportion of type IVc GATA motifs (24.3%), followed by Sacchromycotina (17.3%) and Pezizomycotina (7.5%).

When type IVc GATA motifs were phylogenetically analyzed, fungal type IVc motifs were grouped apart from plant GATA factors (bootstrap value, 99.45; Fig.

7).

GATA motifs of subphylum Saccharomycotina had 19 and 20 residues.

Multiple sequence alignment of these motifs suggests the gain or loss of one amino acid at position 14 between the two cysteine pairs in the zinc finger loop.

In Basidiomycota, six unique 21-residue GATA motifs were found in three strains of C. neoformans, and these grouped together with 20-residue motifs in the same clade.

The 19- and 20-residue motifs of yeast also grouped together and have been characterized as transcription factors with DNA-binding ability (Maxon and Herskowitz, 2001; Munchow et al., 2002).

These results strongly support the hypothesis that 21-residue type IVc motifs found in this study could be classified as transcription factors.

In Pezizomycotina, all GATA TFs with type IVc motifs

had an additional domain of SNF5/SMARCB1/INI1.

With

highly conserved domain architecture, sequences of GATA motifs were also well conserved (Fig.

7B).

Except for NP_588001.1 in S. pombe, 75% of the loop sequences were highly conserved among the 11 GATA motifs.

Schizosaccharomyces     japonica,     for     which     annotation data are not publicly available, has similar GATA factors, with the SNF5/SMARCB1/INI1 domain showing 66.9% amino    acid    identity.

These    facts    strongly    suggest    that Pezizomycotina-specific type IVc motifs share a common ancestor with Taphrinomycotina.

With an exponential increase in the number of fully sequenced genomes, determining the biological functions of hypothetical proteins from genomic sequences has become a central goal of bioinformatics.

Based on the assumption that proteins that function in a similar pathway are likely to evolve in a correlated fashion, our phylogenetic

profiling and comparative analysis of 396 putativeGATA factors from 50 complete fungal genome sequences strongly     support     comparative     phylogenomics     as     an alternative    strategy    for    in    silico    functional    prediction    of uncharacterized genes, using evolutionary analysis at the genome-wide level.

Thus, we have provided not only an inventory of fungal GATA transcription factors, but also a platform    for    comparative    genomic    analyses    of    other transcription factor families.

Genomics     and     Applications     Center     (0462-20060021) and Crop Functional Genomics Center (CG1421) of the 21st Century Frontier Research Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology, by a grant from Biogreen21     project     funded     by     Rural     Development Administration,     and     by     Korean     Research     Foundation Grant (KRF-2004-005-F00013) to Y.-H. Lee.

