Prediction of Mammalian MicroRNA Targets - Comparative Genomics Approach with Longer 3 1 UTR Databases.

MicroRNAs play an important role in regulating gene

expression, but their target identification is a difficult task due to their short length and imperfect complementarity.

Burge and coworkers developed a program called TargetScan that allowed imperfect complementarity and established a procedure favoring targets with multiple binding sites conserved in multiple organisms.

We improved their algorithm in two major aspects - (i) using well-defined UTR (untranslated region) database, (ii) examining the extent of conservation inside the 3’ UTR specifically.

Average length in our UTR database, based on the ECgene annotation, is more than twice longer than the Ensembl.

Then, TargetScan was used to identify putative binding sites.

The extent of conservation varies significantly inside the 3 1 UTR.

We used the “tight” tracks in the UCSC genome browser to select the conserved binding sites in multiple species.

By combining the longer 3' UTR data, TargetScan, and tightly conserved blocks of genomic DNA, we identified 107 putative target genes with multiple binding sites conserved in multiple species, of which 85 putative targets are novel.

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs (typically 21-23

nucleotides) that play an important role in regulating post-transcriptional translation.

They bind to the target mRNA by RNA base pairing, which causes target cleavage or translational repression according to the extent of complementarity.

Lin-4 discovered in C. elegans, was the first microRNA (Lee etal., 1993; Wightman etal., 1993).

It has multiple complementary sites in 3‘ UTR of lin-14.

Binding of lin-4 to lin-14 leads to transition between larval stages, which suggested microRNA’s role in developmental control.

To date, several hundred microRNAs have been identified from various organisms and their sequences are available at the Rfam miRNA registry website ( http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Rfam ) (Ambros etal., 2003a; Griffiths-Jones, 2004).

MicroRNAs have various regulatory roles other than controlling developmental timing.

For example, bantam promotes cell proliferation (Abrahante et al., 2003) and Drosophila miR-14 coordinates multiple cellular responses to stress (Xu et al., 2003).

Recent study reports that human miR-15 and miR-16 are located in a region frequently deleted in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which means that microRNAs may be tumor suppressors (Calin etal., 2002).

Functions of microRNAs are closely related to their target gene.

There are not many microRNAs with known targets in animal.

Targets of lin-4, let-7, bantam, and hsa-miR-196 are experimentally verified (Abrahante et al., 2003; Brennecke et al., 2003; Lin et al., 2003; Olsen et al., 1999; Seggerson et al., 2002; Yekta et al., 2004).

Recently we have seen many attempts to identify microRNA targets computationally in plants and animals.

While simple homology search performs well for target search in plants since they usually require almost perfect complementarity (Ambros et al., 2003b; Bartel et al., 2003), target prediction in animal (Enright et al., 2003; Kiriakidou et al., 2004; Lewis et al., 2003; Rajewsky et al., 2004; Rhoades et al., 2002; Stark et al., 2003) is much more difficult because of the absence of extensive complementarity between mammalian microRNAs and their targets (Doench etal., 2003; Lee etal., 1993; Moss et al., 1997; Olsen et al., 1999; Reinhart et al., 2000; Wightman etal., 1993; Zeng etal., 2002).

It is found that the 5‘ core element of microRNA should be nearly perfectly complementary to the target even though partial complementarity between microRNA and its target is allowed in animal.

It implies that the residue 2-8


in the microRNA is an important factor in recognizing target sites, and this microRNA seed is conserved in invertebrates and in the homologous metazoan region (Lewis etal., 2003; Lim etal., 2003).

Recently, Lewis et al.

developed a robust target prediction program, TargetScan, which utilizes the seed match and multiple binding sites conserved among different species (Lewis et al., 2003).

They extracted 3 1 UTR regions from the Ensembl gene models ( http://www.ensembl.org ) and extended the annotated UTRs by 2kb to compensate for insufficient UTR annotation in the rat genome.

TargetScan predicted 451 putative mammalian microRNA targets, and they found experimental support for 11 targets out of 15 predicted targets using the luciferase reporter assay.

However, when we examined the predicted binding sites in those 15 target genes, we found that approximately 25 % of those binding sites were not conserved in other species.

Furthermore, 3’ UTR region of many genes are longer than 2 kbp.

We present a protocol that improves the TargetScan algorithm by constructing a better UTR database and by examining the extent of conservation inside the 3’ UTR specifically.

/tfcraRAM Database; The Rfam database ( http://www.sanger .

ac.uk/Software/Rfam/ ) was used as a source of microRNA gene database (Ambros et al., 2003a; Griffiths-Jones, 2004).

The Rfam release 3.0 was downloaded, and 152 mature microRNAs from human were selected for target

identification.

Most microRNAs are identical in human, mouse, and rat.

3' UTR database: ECgene version 1.1 (hg16, mm4, m3 for human, mouse, rat, respectively at UCSC) was used to extract the 3 1 UTR regions of human, mouse, and rat genomes.

ECgene (Kim et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2005) builds gene models taking alternative splicing into consid­ eration, and the redundant 3' UTRs from splice variants were removed from the dataset to build the non-re- dundant 3 1 UTR database.

The non-redundant human 3' UTR data in the UTRdb (Pesole eta!., 2002) Release 17 is available at http://bighost.area.ba.cnr.it/BIG/UTRHome .

Comparative genonics data: Among several comparative genomics tracks available in the UCSC genome site, we chose the “tight” track of the conserved blocks since they were filtered with most stringent conditions.

The average block size is approximately 200 bp both for human-mouse and human-rat genomes.

The “net” track ignores small

indels to make longer conserved blocks whose average block size is 600 bp for human-mouse comparison.

The data was downloaded from the UCSC ftp site ( ftp://genome .

ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg16 ).

TargetScan program available at http://genes.mit.edu/ targetscan was used to find the microRNAs targets.

We applied theTargetScan program for all microRNAs using our own UTR datasets from the ECgene for human, mouse, and rat genomes.

We used the default parameters for TargetScan.

Initially, TargetScan searches for com­ plementary matches (so called the “seed match”) for bases 2~8 of the microRNA (numbered from the 5' end).

The complementary seeds are extended in both directions, and the remaining 3' portion of microRNA is optimally aligned within 35 bases flanking the target UTR seed.

When the distance between adjacent seed matches is less than 20 bases, the downstream seed match is discarded as in the original TargetScan paper.

To use the comparative genomics information available at the UCSC genome center, the target positions within the UTR sequence were converted into the genomic coordinates.

The gene structure should be taken into consideration since the UTR region may contain intron sequences.

Determining conserved target sites is not a trivial task since there are so many putative target sites from the TargetScan and so many conserved blocks in the “tight” tracks.

In an effort to reduce the number of comparisons, the binning scheme was implemented as described in the UCSC genome browser paper (Karolchik etal., 2003; Kent etal., 2002).

Target genes with multiple binding sites are usually preferred.

Lewis etal.

implemented this idea as the Z score that sums contribution of multiple binding sites using the binding energies obtained from Vienna RNA package.

In this study, filtering target sites using tight conservation criterion left manageable number of target sites.

So we constructed a database containing all conserved target sites.

A simple database query can extract target genes with multiple binding sites if necessary.

Conservation of microRNA and target sequences among


difference species is an important clue for their functional importance.

Homology by amino acid comparison is not enough to identify microRNA target sites since we need the conservation in the 3’ UTR, not in the CDS (coding sequence) region.

The whole 3’ UTR is not necessarily conserved in other species.

We examined the conservation for 40 predicted binding sites in 14 target genes used in the luciferase reporter assay by Lewis et al.

Using the PhyloHMM score (Siepel et al., 2004a; Siepel et al., 2004b) available at the UCSC genome browser, we found that only 30 binding sites had average score over 0.5.

This demonstrates that the extent of conservation should be specifically examined for each binding sites in the UTR, and the comparative genomics approach is a viable method to confirm whether each binding site is conserved in multiple species.

We also performed a simulation test on the selection ratio achieved by adopting this cross-species conservation.

We selected a random test set of 56 microRNAs from 152 microRNAs in the Rfam.

A shuffled set was prepared by randomly permuting the microRNA sequences with their nucleotide composition unchanged.

Then we ran the TargetScan to identify the binding sites using the set of longest UTR for each ECgene cluster (refer to the next section).

Transcripts with multiple binding sites were 36491 and 20615 for the test set and the shuffled set, respectively.

Therefore, selection ratio by multiple binding sites is 1.77:1.

Examining conservation of the predicted site with PhyloHMM score over 0.9 resulted in 396 and 158 target transcripts for the two sets.

This implies that the selection ratio by multiple binding sites and cross-species conservation is 2.51:1.

Proper 3 1 UTR database is necessary for microRNA target identification.

Lewis et al.

used the Ensembl database.

Ensembl Human v20.34c.1 includes 22287 human genes, 16203 of those with annotated 3‘ UTR region.

6084 genes do not have 3 1 UTR region and UTR region is not long enough even for those annotated genes.

To alleviate this problem, Lewis et al.

extended the annotated 3‘ UTR region by 2 kbp arbitrarily in their TargetScan calculation.

Even though this approach recovers UTR regions for many genes, it certainly introduces false target sites in the intergenic region.

We used the ECgene annotation that has several merits over other gene predictions.

First, it includes extensive gene modeling for gene variants from alternative splicing.

So UTR variation from alternative splicing or polyA can be naturally taken into consideration.

Second, the 3 1 UTR region in the ECgene is highly reliable since it is based on EST clustering that includes ample 3‘ EST sequences.

Furthermore, the 3‘ UTRs are substantially longer since they are extended by overlapping EST sequences aligned in the same orientation.

In Fig.

1, we compare the length distribution of the 3‘ UTR databases from the Ensembl and ECgene.

We extracted 24956 transcripts with 3 1 UTRs in the Ensembl human using the EnsMart system (Kasprzyk etal., 2004) and identified corresponding 16201 ECgene transcripts by cross-referencing with RefSeq ID.

More than 40 % of the Ensembl transcripts have 3 1 UTRs shorter than 300 bp while only about 24% of the ECgene transcripts have less than 300 bp 3‘ UTRs.

The average 3‘ UTR lengths are 549 and 1137 bp for the Ensembl and the ECgene, respectively.

ECgene’s UTR length is almost twice longer than corresponding Ensembl genes on average.

It is also noteworthy that 2745 ECgene transcripts have 3’ UTR region longer than 2 kbp and that 3’ UTR region of


1116 transcripts is longer than 3 kbp.

Extending UTR region by 2 kbp in the original TargetScan work may not be effective forthose genes.

Similar comparison with the manually curated UTRdb (Pesole et al., 2002) shows that ECgene’s UTR length is longer than UTRdb by 16%.

Therefore, we believe that our 3' UTR dataset should be ideal to find any charactristic features within the 3’ UTR such as microRNA target sites.

Brief overview of our strategy is summarized in Fig.

2.

All human microRNAs were downloaded from the Rfam site ( http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Rfam/ ).

Database of 3' UTR sequences were constructed from all ECgene (Kim et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2005) transcripts with annotated coding sequences.

ECgene contained 269,702 distinctive 3 1 UTR regions for the human transcriptome.

Target genes of each miRNA were predicted using the TargetScan program for our own 3 1 UTR datasets for human, mouse and rat.

We found 1,123,986 putative target sites in the human 3 1 UTR data.

UTR regions in mouse and rat genomes contained 934,796 and 207,200 target sites, respectively.

Comparative genomics data available at the UCSC ge­

nome center were used to find conserved target sites in three organisms.

We used the “tight” track (tight subset of the best alignments obtained by BLASTZ) (Schwartz etat, 2003), which satisfied the most stringent requirements.

Applying the conservation criterion greatly reduced the number of target sites.

We found -28,000 target sites con­ served between the human and mouse genomes, which was only 0.7% of miRNAhuman target sites (1,123,986) found by TargetScan.

Approximately 13,000 conserved target sites were found for the human and rat genomes.

Combining two pair-wise comparisons gave -8,000 target sites con­ served in the human, mouse, and rat genomes.

Selecting target genes with multiple (>2) conserved binding sites for a specific microRNA, we found 107 target genes.

To compare our result with the original TargetScan work by Lewis et al., we downloaded all target genes and the binding sites from the TargetScan website.

They published 442 target genes with multiple (>2) conserved binding sites, which were considerably larger than our 107 target genes.

We shall refer to their result as “Ensembl targets” since they used the Ensembl gene annotation.

Our result is substantially different from the Ensembl


targets.

Only 22 out of 107 genes are found by both methods.

Table 1 is the list of those common target genes from the two studies.

It shows that 15 of 22 genes are targets of the same or similar microRNAs.

Detailed examination, however, reveals that many genes are targets of different microRNAs even for those common
 target genes.

The difference is clearer in Table 2 that shows the target genes found by the two methods for 10 important microRNAs.

Complete list is provided as a supplementary material.

We do not find many common target genes (shown in bold character), and describe factors for the difference below.

The most influential factor is the way to determine whether the target site is conserved in other species.

Lewis etal.

used the homologous gene information in the Ensembl annotation system (Birney etal., 2004).

Ensembl homologues are obtained by comparing the amino acid sequence of proteins (Clamp etal., 2003).

Even though this is perfectly valid for comparing coding regions, it does not guarantee that the UTR regions are conserved.

The “Conservation” track (Siepel etal., 2004a) in Fig.

3 shows the conservation level obtained by comparing five organisms (human, chimp, mouse, rat, and chicken).

It can be immediately recognized that the extent of sequence conservation varies dramatically inside the 3‘ UTR region.

Our method uses the “tight” track that includes conserved blocks of high quality only as can be seen in Fig.

3.

This is the major reason why the number of target genes is substantially smaller in the ECgene targets.

All of our target sites are highly likely to be conserved in other species, which reduces risk of being false positives.

Another big difference is the gene model and the

resultant UTR.

ECgene’s UTR is significantly longer than other gene models since its algorithm tries to extend the UTR regions if it finds any overlapping ESTs with the same direction.

Detailed comparison is given in the next section.

Furthermore, alternative splicing is extensively modeled in the ECgene (Kim etal., 2004; Kim etal., 2005), which greatly expands the number of transcripts.

Current Ensembl database (Ensembl Human v20.34c.1) includes 35685 transcripts from 23758 genes.

Approximately 70% (16534) of Ensembl have single transcript and remaining 7224 genes give 19151 transcripts, implying 2.65 isoforms per gene if the gene is alternatively spliced.

However, current knowledge implies that -70% of human genes are alternatively spliced and that -3.5 isoforms exist for alternatively spliced genes.

Therefore transcripts in the Ensembl do not reflect diversity from alternative splicing adequately.

Our UTR database based on ECgene has 269702 distinct UTR regions.

Even though it may include many false positives, its coverage should be most complete.

The difference is explored in the following cases in detail.

We observed in Tables 1 and 2 that target genes are much different between two methods.

For example, CYP26B1 (Nelson, 1999), a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes, is target of miR-93 and miR-302 in our study, whereas miR-141 is the binding microRNA in the original TargetScan study.

Fig.

3 summarizes relevant information for CYP26B1 in the genome browser.

It shows the gene structures, binding sites, and comparative genomics data.

All target sites found by the TargetScan program are listed without filtering by conservation or multiple binding sites.

The 3 1 UTR regions are more or less the same between the ECgene, Ensembl gene, and RefSeq gene tracks.

Both


miR-93 and miR-302 have two identical binding sites (shown in the red boxes).

Several tracks are available for comparative genomics.

The “conservation” track (Human/ Chimp/Mouse/Rat/Chicken Multiz Alignments & PhyloHMM Cons) is especially useful (Siepel etal., 2004b).

It can be immediately seen that we have two large conserved blocks - one for the last exon and the other near the end of 3‘ UTR region.

The “mouse tight” track is collection of most highly conserved blocks.

Other tracks such as “chain” and “net” are conservation with less stringent conditions.

We observe that two binding sites of miR-93 and miR-302 appear within the highly conserved genomic locus.

The Ensembl target, hsa-miR-141, has three binding sites (shown in boxes) for this gene, which is advantageous over miR-93 and miR-302 with two binding sites.

However, the conservation level for these target sites is much lower in the “conservation” track, and they do not qualify for conserved blocks in the mouse tight track.

Even though targets with multiple binding sites are generally preferred, the mechanism underlying the cooperativeness between the binding sites is not established well.

Conservation in other species should be a clear evidence for its functional importance.

Therefore, CYP26B1 would not be a good target for hsa-miR-141 since its binding sites are not conserved in high standard.

This example shows that finding target genes for microRNAs needs subtle adjustment of various aspects such as multiple binding sites and conservation among different species.

PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) is an important gene involved in regulation of the AKT1 signaling pathway.

Mutations of PTEN are found in a large number of cancers and it is a potential tumor suppressor gene (Di Cristofano et al., 2000).

Lewis et al.

identified PTEN as a target of two microRNAs - hsa-miR-19a and hsa-miR-19b.

Our method did not find any microRNA targeting this gene.

The main reason was that the PTEN annotation in rat did not have UTR at all.

Lewis etal.

cleverly extended the 3‘ UTR region by 2 kbp to alleviate this problem.

Fig.

4 shows the 3' UTR of human PTEN with predicted target sites.

The 3' UTR is unusually long - 6.5 kbp and 1.2 kbp in the ECgene and Ensembl, respectively.

Even though the human PTEN has three binding sites as Lewis et al.

found, only the first two binding sites are found in the mouse PTEN and the rat PTEN has only one binding site.

So hsa-miR-19a and hsa-miR-19b do not have multiple conserved binding sites in PTEN.

Instead, we identified many other conserved binding sites as shown in Fig.

4.

The major hurdle in identifying conserved targets is the poor annotation in the rat genome.

The UTR in the mouse PTEN is 3.3 kbp long, but there are

many neighboring EST transcripts and it is expected to be as long as the UTR of human PTEN.

So, we extended the UTRs of PTEN in mouse and rat to be 6.5 kbp comparable to the human PTEN.

The number of binding sites found by TargetScan is shown in Table 3.

We found additional binding sites for five microRNAs (hsa-miR-30a, hsa-miR- 23a, hsa-miR-23b, hsa-miR-29b, hsa-miR-29c).

Fur­ thermore, four additional microRNAs (hsa-miR-200a, hsa- miR-181a, hsa-miR-181b, hsa-miR-181c) were identified to have multiple conserved binding sites for PTEN.

Hsa-miR-23a and hsa-miR-23b have four binding sites in human as shown in Fig.

4 and Table 3.

The fourth binding site does not belong to the conserved block as can be seen in the conservation track.

Three other binding sites appear inside the conserved region.

However, the third binding site is located outside the 2 kbp extended region of Ensembl UTR (indicated as long vertical lines in brown color in Fig.

4).

So, extending by 2 kbp would not be enough for genes with long 3’ UTR.

Comparison of our method with the original TargetScan program suggests many important aspects in target prediction of microRNAs.

First, using properly annotated 3' UTR database is essential.

Extending 3‘ UTR by an arbitrary length is not desirable since it increases false positives by introducing target sites outside the real UTR.

Extension of 2 kbp was not enough for the case study of PTEN.

We need a compromise between sensitivity and specificity.

Selecting 3' UTR of reliable transcripts in the

ECgene or Acembly genes (D. Therry-Mieg et al.

http://www.

ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IEB/Research/Acembly ) database would be the best choice for human and mouse genomes at this point.

However, this is not true for rat which has only ~0.6 million ESTs in the dbEST, compared with 5.64, 4.18 million ESTs for human and mouse, respectively.

Proper annotation of 3' UTR is impossible in rat due to the draft quality of the rat genome and insufficient EST data.

Their effect on target prediction of microRNAs is obvious as can be seen in Fig.

2.

Number of rat transcripts is appro­ ximately 1/3 of human or mouse, and the number of microRNAitarget pairs are reduced to 1/5 in rat.

It might be better to compare just human and mouse genomes, waiting for the rat genome map to be more complete.

This would increase the number of target genes substantially.

Alternatively, one may extend the 3' UTR of rat by the amount inferred by human and mouse homologs, not beyond the gap position.

Another important aspect is the conservation of target sites in different organisms.

As seen in Fig.

3 and 4, the extent of conservation varies significantly inside the 3 1 UTR, which is not taken into consideration in previous studies.

It would be better to count the target binding sites within the tightly conserved blocks only.

Two comparative genomics tracks-PhyloHMM and Blastz tight - in the UCSC genome browser should be good candidates (Schwartz et al., 2003; Siepel eta/., 2004a).

We used the tight tracks for convenience since it provides pairwise comparison of genomes.

Recent study of Yekta et al.

identified HOXB8 as the target of hsa-miR-196 (Yekta etal., 2004).

The target site is nearly perfectly complementary to the microRNA.

TargetScan allows target binding with mismatches and bulges, producing target sites of 42-43 nucleotides long.

Interestingly, TargetScan could not locate the target site for hsa-miR-196 because the target site has one mismatch in the 5’ seed region (2-8 bp of microRNA).

This suggests that minor mismatches in the seed region should be allowed in search of microRNA targets.

